THE
BOMBER’S BAEDEKER
(Guide to the Economic Importance of German Towns and Cities)
2nd (1944) Edition.
Part I.
AACHEN-KÜSTRIN

Enemy Branch (Foreign Oilieo & Ministry of Economic Warfare)
THE BOMBER'S BAEDEKER
(Guide to the Economic Importance of German Towns & C ties) 2nd (1944) Edition.
PART I
AACHEN-KÜSTRIN
•Coo. 00
k
Enemy Branch,
(Foreign Office & Ministry of Economic Warfare).
PREPACK
1,	The 1944 edition of the "Bcmber's Baed revised and amplified version of Part III edition,which it replaces. It has been scope to cover all towns in Germany (re which are of any industrial significance, and it has been possible to expand the number of industrial establishments listed in each town. Information relating to the activities of particular factories has been revised in the light of the latest available intelligence.
2.	As in the previous edition, enterprises have been grouped under fourteen industrial headings as follows:-
1.	Transportation
2.	Public Utility Services
3.	Solid Fuels
4.	Liquid Riels & Substitutes	%
5.	Iron, Steel, & Ferro-Alloys
6.	Non-Ferrous Metal Smelting, Refining,
A Manufacture
7.	Aircraft & Aero-engines
8.	Shipbuilding
9.	Othei' Engineering and Armament Industries
10.	Chemicals & Explosives
11.	Textiles, Rayon, Pulp & Paper
12.	Rubber & Tyres
13.	Leather
14.	Food industries
3.	The descriptions of activities and the figures in the column entitled "Priority" are intended only as a general guide to the size and relative importance of the individual undertakings. The basis on which the "Priority" ratings have been allotted is as follows:-
1+	Factories of	outstanding importance
in the German war effort.
1	Major plants	in major industries
2	Minor plants	in major industries
$
or
Major plants	in minor industries
3	Factories of	relatively small
importance in the German war effort.

Factories which are almost certainly of little importance in the German war effort and establishments concerning which the available information is not sufficient to enable any priority rating to be allotted.
Some of the works included without priority are new establishments the activities of which are uncertain; some of them would doubtless rank for inclusion in one of the four priority groups if full information were available.
In allotting priorities account has been taken of the damage inflicted in area attack only in cases where the productivity of the factory concerned appears to have been permanently affected. In other cases factories are assessed on the basis that they have been fully repaired and are fully active. Owing to the speed with which repairs are put in nand in Borne cases, it did not seem practicable to give weight to damage which may prove to be temporary in assessing priorities which are intended for long-term reference.
The priority rating of a factory in the Bomber's Baedeker consequently does not neoessarily reflect its current importance and should not be used for the purpose of appreciations without reference to its current damage status. If the demand from users justifies it, however, periodical statements can be issued to show the current status of damaged factories as well as other amendments.
4.	Owing to its increased size it eras been necessary to bind the new edition in two parts, of which the first includes,
in alphabetical order, the towns AACHEN to KÜSTRIN; and the second the towns LAHR to ZVICKAU.
Each part is accompanied by maps showing: -
a)	All towns covered by the 1944 edition of the Bomber's BaedeKer.
b)	The method of division of the industriell area of the Ruhr into fourteen districts.
An index is in course of preparation.
5.	Enquiries relating to this report should be addressed to: -
E.B.3
Enemy Branch (P.0. & M.E.W.) Lansdowne House,
Berkeley Square,
London, ’.V.l.
Enemy Branch,
(Foreign Office & Ministry of Economic Warfare).
May 1944

A A C H E N (Rhineland)
50° 47’ N. 6° 5’E: 275 miles from London: (Population 164,000) Aachen is an important railway Junction on one of the main routes from North-West Germany into Belgium and France. I t is the centre of a large coal-mining area, and many of the companies exploiting these mines have their adm inistrative o ffic e s in the town. In peace-time te x tile s formed the main industry in Aachen proper. There are a large number of spinning and weaving m ills, many of which were closed early in the war. The leading firms of Aachen’ s engineering and rubber industry are mentioned below. The town has been heavily damaged by bombing, and the production of several of these firms reduced, but much of the industrial damage, p articu la rly to the main fa c to rie s, has been repaired. The industries are mainly grouped in the North East corner of the town along the Jülicherstrasse, and in the Rothe Erde d is tr ic t, east of the town centre. Several of the te x tile m ills in the Jülicher­ strasse, which have been closed down, are now said to be used as dummies. The central part of the town is clo sely b u ilt, and has largely preserved it s mediaeval character.
TYPE AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVES LOCATION PRIORITY
RATING
Transportation
Railway Junction Aachen-West (2) The main line Westwards from Cologne passes round the Southern edge of the town centre and crosses an inportant viaduct immediately to the East of the main railway station. At th is station the lin e divides, one branch leading to Verviers and Liege, 25 miles West of Aachen, and the second leading , Northwards round the town centre to the Aachen-West Station, near to Which, a second important track leads by another route to Liege. From the Aachen-West Station, a main lin e leads North East to Krefeld and the Ruhr. These are the trunk lin es which , « connect the industrial Rhineland d irect with Antwerp and, through the Meuse valley, with North Eastern France. Further inportant branch lin es lead from Aachen North East to Maastricht and Holland, and, from the Nord- bahnhof Station, to Jülich and the coal mining region to the North East of the town.
Marshalling Yards Aachen-West {2) Immediately to the North West of the Aachen- West Railway Station is the larg est of the town’ s goods yards, with marshalling yairds capable of handling 3,000 wagons per 24 hours. There are other goods stations immediately to the West of the main railway station, and in the Rothe Erde d is tr ic t to the East of the town.
2
Railway Repair Shops Aachen-West (2) These are medium-sized rep air shops under­ taking the rep air of goods wagons. They adjoin the goods yards West of the main railway s ta tio n .
Public U tility Services Power -Station Aachen (3) The municipal power statio n has a capacity of 50 W.
Gas Works
(3)
The Städtische Gaswerke (Municipal Gas Works) supplies the town of Aachen and most of the surrounding area. I ts sales in 1936 amomted to about 650 m illion cubic feet of gas.
Solid Fuels Gewerkschaft “Carolus Magnus"
Paleriberg Ubach-Palenberg (3) The Carolus Magpus Mine lie s about 10 miles North of Aachen at Ubach-Palenberg.
I t has a coking plant of 100 ovens and a maximum rated dry coal capacity of 35°,000 tens per annum. In 1936 the hard coal output at th is mine was 1 m illion tons.
Gewerkschaft Karl Alexander Baesweiler (3) This company has a mine and coking plant at Baesweiler about 9 miles North- North East of Aachen. The coking plant has 20 ovens and a dry coal capacity of 60,000 tans per annum.
In 1936 the hard ooal output of the mines was about 1,000,000 tons.
5
Engineering and Armaments
H. Krantz
Industriestr. (3)
The Maschinenfabrik H. Krantz formerly specialised in the making of textile machinery. The plant employs approximate­ ly 1,000 workers and is believed to be now converted for the manufacture of arms and small arms components as well as S.A. A. Situated within the factory site of this firm is the affiliated works of H. Krantz Söhne employing about 300 workers on armaments.
Garbe Lahmeyer A. Gw Jfllicherstr. (2) This firm formerly specialised in the making of adbKdosxMi dynamos and accessories« as well,, as steel cylinders and other pressure containers. It has been reported that these works have been partly turned over to the making of small electric motors for U-böats, submarine accessories and other armaments. It is believed that 2,000 to 3,000 workers are employed.
Waggonfabrik Talbot Jfllicherstr. (3) These railway wagon builders specialize in bodybuilding and self discharging wagons and are now also building heavy military vehicles. 800 workers are employed.
Anton Veltrup & Go. Jfllicherstr. (3) This firm is reported now to employ some 500 workers on the manufacture of tool machines for Junkers and for submarines.
Schumacher Aachen (3) The Schumacher Metallwerk A.G. (Schumag) are specialists in precision machine tools and employed some 700 workers before the war.
Rubber and tyres
Englebert & Co. G.nub.H. Rothe Erde (1) The pre-war capacity of these inportant manufacturers of rubber tyres and tubes was 75>000 truck and motor tyres per annum. During the war the plant was largely concentrated on the heavier truck tyres, the production of which rose to 6,000 per month. Approximately 1,000 workers are employed. These works are reported to be making tyres with 85% Buna content. There was no aero­ plane tyre production before the war, but it is believed that a proportion of these were later included in the factory’s output. This factory also turns out retreaded and bicycle tyres. Its reclaim capacity is believed to be 200 tons per annum.
Pongs & Co. Rothe Erde (3) This firm manufactures a wide range of technical rubber goods.
---- oOo-----
A A L E N ( Wasser-Alfingen)
48 50’N. 10 5 ’ E: 490 miles: (17,000)
Engineering and Armaments
Maschinenfabrik Alfingen-Kessler A.G. Wasser-Alfingen (1) It is believed that in 1942 this factory employed some 3,500 workers (including a large number of P/W. ) on the machining of crankshafts for aero-engines, sub­ marines and motor vehicles. Approximately 30 to 40 per cent, of the total output is reported to be in the form of aero-engine crankshafts.
---- oOo— -r—
5
A H L E N (Westphalia)
51° 45’ N. 7° 55’ E: 345 miles: (26,000) Ahlen is situated on the main railway line from Berlin to the Rhineland and lie s between B ielefeld and Hamm. I t has no great in d u strial significance, though there are a few white metal and enamel works, two of which are mentioned below. There are also several «mal 1 shoe facto ries, but no other industries which are individually of note.
Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication Rollman & Tovar A. G. Ahlen (J) This firm has three separate works in Ahlen engaged on metal moulding, standing and enamelled work.
Schomaker & Cie. A.G. Ahlen (J) This finn manufactures white metal products of various kinds.
-------oOo-------
A K E N (Province Saxony)
51° 50' N. 12° E: 525 miles: (12,000) Aken is 5 miles West of Dessau, and on the South bank of the Elbe. There are no industries of in^ortance, apart from the non­ ferrous metal works mentioned below.
Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication Aluminium Werke Aken A.G. Aken (2) This works is b u ilt in a fo re st on the le f t bank of the Elbe, and on the Eastern side of Aken. These works went into production in 19J8. I ts estimated output as per September 1943 is 10,000 tons of aluminium per annum. The magnesium capacity is 8,000 tons per annum.
------o0o-------
A L B B R U C K near Waldshut 47° 36' N. 8° 8' E: 460 miles (6,800) Public U tility Services '
Rheinkraftwerk Albbruck-Dogern A.G. Albbruck (2) The capacity of th is power station is 72 MW. So far as is known there is no local transmission, the whole of the output of the plant being supplied over three 100 kV lin es to Tiengen substation. -------oOo-------
6
ALLENDORF  (Hesse Nassau) 50° 50» N. 8° 50* E: 390 miles: (20,500)
Formerly a small village, Allendorf is reported to have recently grown in size owing to the building of the explosives and filling factory of the Dynamit A. -Gk Chemicals and Explosives
Dynamit A.G* nr. Allendorf ( 2 ) This factory is operated by DYNAMIT A.G.
It has been constructed in the course of the present war. It has been reported by ground sources as being of exception­ ally great size, and as being associated with a variety of activities. Photo­ graphic cover of September, 1941,suggests that the plant is engaged primarily in the production of finished propellant powders, but does not show it to be extremely large. On the other hand, a variety of reports received in 1942 and 1943 suggest that great extensions have been made during the last two years, the proposed completion date being given as September, 1943« In view of the number of such reports, it must be assumed that a very considerable powder factory now exists at this site, but it is not possible to give an estimate of its capacity. The factory is situated near Kassel slightly to the east of Allendorf village.
---- oOo-----
ALLENSTEIN (East Prussia)
53° 45' Nt 20° 50’ Es 880 miles: (48,000) Allenstein is on the main railway from Berlin to Insterburg and the Eastern Front. It is situated in the Southern part of East Prussia. The town is mainly an agricultural market centre and apart from the Railway Repair Shops mentioned below, there are no industries of importance.
Transportation
Railway Repair Shops Allenstein (2)
These are large repair shops employing some 3,000 workers and undertaking the repair of all kinds of rolling stock.
---- oOo-----
7
A L S D O R F (Rhineland) 50° 55* N. 6 ° 10’ E: 270 m iles: (20,000) A lsdorf i s 5 m iles N ortheast of Aachen and i t s in d u s tr ia l a c tiv ity i s c h ie fly connected w ith th e coal mines in th e surrounding d i s t r i c t .
There i s no o th e r in d u stry of in ^o rtan ce o th e r than a liq u id f u e l p la n t l i s t e d below.
P u b lic U t i l i t y S ervices Power P lan t A lsdorf (3) This therm al e le c tr ic power p la n t is adjacent to th e coal mines of Eschw eiler Bergwerks V erein Ä.G. and has a cap acity of J7 mW. A la rg e p ro p o rtio n of the power i s su pplied to the Aachen region.
Gas Works A lsdorf (-) The coking p la n t of the E schw eiler Bergwerks V erein A.G. which i s mentioned below under S o lid F u els, su p p lie s gas through the long d ista n c e system to in d u s trie s as f a r as Cologne.
S o lid Fuels
45 ovens i s b e lie v e d to be in a c tiv e .
Anna Coal Mine A lsdorf (2) The Eschw eiler Bergwerks V erein A. G* owns f iv e la rg e co al mines in t h i s a re a , of which two, the ’’Anna” and the "M aria” p i t s , a re in th e immediate v i c in ity of A lsdorf. The to t a l output of th e mines of th is concern i s 8 m illio n tons p e r annum. Adjoining the "Anna” coal mine i s a larg e coking p la n t w ith 498 ovens, of which 173 are modern, and an annual c a p a c ity of 1 m illio n tons of coke. The coking p la n t a t the M aria mines which has
Liquid F uels Teernerwertungs-Ges. m. b. H. A lsdorf (3) This i s a branch of th e D uisburg firm of the same name. I t is m ainly engaged on d i s t i l l a t i o n and p ro c e ssin g of coal t a r .
•
--------oOo--------
8
A L T D AM M (nr. Stettin) 53° 25’ N. U ° 40’ E: 640 m iles: (15,200) Altdamm is on the righ t bank of the Oder opposite to S tettin , from which i t is some four miles distant. The normal peace-time industries include flo u r m illing and a wood pulp factory. Its importance has now greatly increased owing to the development of the large aero engine works mentioned below.
A ircraft and Aero Engines Ponmersche Motorenbau Altdamm (1 These works employ some 3,000 workers and build aero-engines ch ie fly for Junkers type a irc ra ft. The factory includes testin g and experimental shops and is believed to undertake a certain amount of repair work. (The location of th is plant is sometimes given as Arnimswalde).
------------0 O 0 ------------
A L T E N A (Westphalia) 51° 15' N. 7 ° 40' E: 340 m iles: (17,000) Along the v a lle y of the River Lenne, in which Altena is one of the principal towns, there are a number of indu strial settlements which, though many are individually small, are c o lle c tiv e ly of great importance to the German metal industry. Two of the larger plants in Altena are mentioned below. There are, however, a very large number of smaller facto ries and workshops engaged in a ll kinds of lig h t metal work.
Engineering and Armaments
V.D.M.
Altena (2)
The works of the Vereinigte Deutsche Metallwerke vorm. Basse & Selve, comprise metal foundries, ro llin g m ills, wire drawing plant fo r the fabrication of non­ ferrous metals, and also a motor works where small D iesel engines are produced.
They employ some 800 workers. The nickel refin ery of th is works has a capacity of 2,500 tons per annum.
Gebr. Knipp ing Altena (3) The Nieten & Schraubenfabrik Gebr. Knipping, which is controlled by the Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G», sp ecialise in riv e ts and screws of a ll types. There is also a wire drawing plant. Some 700 workers were employed before the war when the output was said to be 1900 tons per month. The firm is known to be one of the principal suppliers of riv e ts and screws of the Reichsbahn.
Friedrich Petig
9
Altena (3)
This firm employs several hundred workers in the manufacture of machine tools, precision hand tools and measuring instruments*
------- 0O0-------
A L T O N A (Schleswig-Holstein)
See under Hamburg.
- 10 -
A L T E N B U R G (Thuringia) 51° N. 12° 25’ E: 550 miles: (44,000) Altenburg is 25 miles South of Leipzig, and is on the main lin e from North Germany to Munich via Hof. I t lie s to the South of an area of large br. coal deposits, and i s an adm inistrative centre for the firms exploiting these. The manufacture of sewing machines was among the town’s peace-time industries, and the factory mentioned below is now engaged on armaments. The town’s other a c tiv itie s are mainly ag ricu ltu ral, and there are a number of small facto ries making hats and gloves.
Engineering and Armaments Hermann Kohler A. G. . Altenburg (3) This firm, which makes a well-know type of sewing machine, considerably extended i ts plant and the number of workers in 1935-37 and i s no doubt now turning out products of d irect value to the armaments industry. --------—oOo———— A L T O T T IN G ( Bavaria) 48° 14’ N. 12° 40’ E: 615 miles: (5,800) A ltotting is a small town about 6 miles West of Braunau/Inn (A ustria). A number of in d u strial establishments are reported to have been erected in th is a re a ’ since 1939 but l i t t l e firm i n te ll­ igence i s av ailab le as to th e ir a c tiv itie s .
Chemical and Explosives Bayerische Stickshoffwerke A.G. Gendorf (3) A new large chemical works said to be engaged on explosives and/or propellants is believed to have been erected here but satisfactory confinflation of th is is unavailable. Acc­ ording to ground reports the factory is also know as the Anorgana Werke and employs more than 1,000 workers.
-------- - 0 O 0 - —
A M B E R G (Bavaria) 49° 25» N. 10° 50’ E: 550 Miles: (30,000) Amberg is on the railway lin e which runs eastwards from Nuremberg to the Czechoslovakian fro n tie r. I t is approximately 60 miles East of Nurenberg. I ts present in d u stria l importance iä due to the Luitpoldhtttte steelworks, which are mentioned below.
- 11 -
Engineering and Armaments Luitpo Idhutte Amberg (3) The Amberg steelworks of the Bayerische Berg-Hutten & Salzwerke A.G. (Luipoldhutte) have been taken over by the Hermann Goring concern, and are believed to be working to f u ll extent of th e ir capacity. The works are not on a large scale. There .are three b last furnaces and a steelworks adjoining.
A M M E N D O R F (Saalkreis), Province Saxony 51° 30» N. 12° E. 520 miles: (15,300) Ammendorf has a number of industries ranging from br. coal to chemicals and engineering but the only large factory w ithin the bounderies of the town is G ottfried Lindner A.G. suppliers of bodies fo r commercial vehicles.
Riebeck’sche Montanwerke Ammendorf (j)
/
This firm operates a number of br. coal mines near Ammendorf with a to ta l annual output of three m illion tons and 150,000 tons of briquettes.
Engineering and Armaments
Gottfried Lindner A.G. Ammendorf (2) This is the largest individual works in Germany specializing in bodies for comm­ e rc ia l vehicles and buses. I t normally employs some 2,000 workers but th is number is believed now to exceed 3,000.
----------oOo- -------
A N D E R N A C H / Rhine 50° 26' N. 7° 24’ E: 337 miles: (13,800) Engineering and Armaments Remy, van der lypen & Co Andernach (3) This is a very well equipped works producing tinned and lacquered cold- ro lle d s te e l s trip a t a ra te of 5,000 tons per month. Normally the works employ some 1,200 hands.
- -oOo- -
- 12 -
A N D R E A S H U T T E (S ilesia)
50° 35* N. 18° 30» E: 800 miles: (5,000) Andreashütte i s situated on the main railway lin e between Oppeln and Beuthen. Apart from the large works mentioned below, there are no industries of importance.
Engineering and Armaments
VOHAG
Andreashütte (3)
The Andreasliutte works of the Vereinigte Oberschlesische Hüttenwerke A.G. comprise foundries, ro llin g m ills and drop hammers.
They produce barrels for machine guns, bogey wheels, and suspension components for tanks and gun carriages. 2,000 workers are employed. For further particulars of the VOHAG see under GLEIWITZ.
oOo-
- 13 -
AN KLA M (Pomerania) 53° 50* N. 13° 14* E: 600 miles: (20,000) Anklam is situated on the River Peene, on the main railway lin e between B erlin and Stralsund. I t is the junction , for Swinemhnde. The town’s normal industries, which are on a small scale, include sugar refining, iron foundries and engineering works. The Peene is navigable for small c ra ft and there is some shipping tra ffic . Anklam’s importance however is now due to the a irc ra ft works mentioned below.
A ircraft and Aero Engines Arado Flugzeugwerke Anklam (1) These works make a irc ra ft components, including wings and t a i l units, for the Brandenburg factory of the Arado concern. Complete training a irc ra ft are assembled here. Some 2,000 workers are employed.
A N N A B ER G - (Saxoqy) ,50° 35» N. 13° E; 575 miles: (20,000) Annaberg is close to the former Czechoslovakian fro n tier.
The Auto Union A.G-. of Chemnitz have an iron foundry which is mentioned below, and i t has also been reported that the A.E.G-. have evacuated one of th e ir laboratories to th is town. Normally Annaberg specialises in the manufacture of decorative braids, ta sse ls, cords and sim ilar fancy te x tile products.
Engineering and Armaments Auto Union A.Gr. Annaberg (3) An iron foundry belonging to the Auto Union of Chemnitz is established in Annaberg.
A.E.G.
Annaberg (3)
The Annaberg branch of th is important B erlin firm normally made e le c tric switches, lampholders, sockets, d istrib u tio n board fittin g s and other e le c tric a l appliances on a small scale. The factory has been enlarged since 1939.
Annah&tte (Brandenburg) 51° w N. 13° 54' E: 604 m iles. (3,500) This small mining town lie s approximately 3 miles South East of Finsterwalde. I t has no industries other than those connected with or part of a number of br.ooal mines which are situ ated in the near v ic in ity .
Solid Fuels: ”Grube VTerdmannsheil” Axmahtttte (-) Those mined are owned by the N iederlausitzer Kohlenwerke A.G-. This br.coal mine produced 1,200,000 tons of brown coal and 139,000 tons /o f
- 14 -
of briquettes in 1937* Grube Annahlitte Annahtttte (-) These mines are owned by the Heye Braunkohlen­ werke G.m.b.H. and in 1937 produced 1,275,000 tons of brown coal and 400,000 tons of briquettes* A N S B A C H (Bavaria; 49° 20’ N. 10° 40' E: 490 miles: (25,000) Ansbach is situ ated in M ittelfranken, some 15 miles Southwest of Nürnberg. I t is a market town for the surrounding a g ricu ltu ral d is tr ic t, but has no important industries.
ARNIMSWALDE (near S tettin) See under Altdamm.
A R N S B E R G (Westphalia) 51° 25' N, 8° 10' E: J55 miles: (15,000) Arnsberg is on the railway lin e from Hagen to Kassel I t is a small in d u stria l town in the Southern section of Westphalia on the upper reaches of the River Ruhr. I ts main products are wood pulp, paper and cardboard.
T estiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper Peldmühle Arnsberg (-) This is a branch factory of the Feldmühle Papier and Zellstoffwerke A.G. a widespread concern making wood pulp and paper. The Arnsberg factory specialises chiefly in the production of cardboard. 45O workers are employed. —-—0O0--—-
- 15 -
ARNSTADT (Thuringia)
50° 50* N. 10° 55* E: 485 miles: (22,000) Arnstadt is 7 miles South of Erfurt and. before the war the main activities were the manufacture of china, porcelain, and. leather gloves. In 1938 an important factory was erected, here by Siemens & Ifelske. This is mentioned, below.
Engineering and. Armaments
Siemens & Halske Arnstadt (2)
These works were built in 1938 and produce precision instruments, including those used in U-boats. Nearly 5,000 workers are reported now to be employed in this and in an adjacent plant erected by A.E.G.
Meta Werk Arnstadt (3)
The Meta Metallwerk G. m.b.H» is reported to be making anti-tank shells. This company is believed now to be associated with the Polte arms works of Magdeburg, Rudolf Ley A.G. Arnstadt (-) This firm specialises in the manufacture of machinery for the boot and shoe industry*
— — -oOo— —
ASCHAFFENBURG (Bavaria) 50° N, 9° 10* E: 420 miles: (43,000)
Aschaffenburg is on the main line from Frankfurt a. Main to Wurzburg and Southern Bavaria. It is 25 miles East of Frankfurt, The town is built mainly on the right bank of the River Main, and it is an important transhipment port for the waterborne traffic between North Western and Southern Germany, Theins are a number of industries of various kinds, of which the most important are precision tools, and paper and cellulose.
Transportation
Inland Harbour Aschaffenburg (3) The River Main, which is canalised for heavy barges as far as Asctaffenburg, is planned to take through traffic to the Danube when the projected Main-Danube Canal has been completed.
At present Aschaffenburg is the chief Southern terminal point for this barge traffic, and a considerable tonnage, largely consisting of coal fran the Ruhr, is carried by water to this point and despatched from here to Southern Germany.
The harbour consists of two dock basins, on the left bank of the lfe.in at the Western end of the town.
- 16 -
ASCHAFFENBURG (conti)
Railway Repair Shops Aschaffenburg (3) These are medium sized repair shops undertaking the repair of goods wagons.
Railway Traffic Centre (3) This includes small shunting, goods and marshalling yards.
Public Utility Services
A switching and transformer station Aschaffenburg (3) on the 110 kV line operated by the Bayernwerk company is situated about 600 yards of the docks.
The Städtische Elektrizitätswerke (Municipal power station) is of some importance to the local industry. Ashaffenburg (3) as is the Municipal Gas Works. Ashaffenburg (3)
Engineering and Armaments
Guldner Motorenwerke Ashaffenburg (3)
i
These works belong to the Gesellschaft fur Lindes ’ Eismaschinen A. G., Wiesbaden. They make a variety of machine and hand tools particularly for the motor vehicle industry as well as vertical gas engines of medium h*p.
Aba Werke Ashaffenburg (2) This firm makes precision tools and specialises in machine tools for aero­ engine and aircraft component manufacture.
Approximately 650 workers are employed.
Mikron Werk Aschaffenburg } Ultra Prazisionswerk Aschaffenburg [ (2) Johann Fischer Aschaffenburg '
The above are three of the largest among a number of factories in Aschaffenburg which make precision tools, gauges, and measuring instruments.
B. Seibert Aschaffenburg (2) This firm was originally engaged in steel construction and bridge building. The plant is now being utilised for heavy repairs to A.F.V*s and is said to employ seme 2,000 workers.
- 17 -
ASCHAFFENBURG- (Contd)
Armament Factory Aschaffenburg (-) It is reported that approximately 9 kms. to the South of Aschaffenburg, a factory has been erected, which employs over 1,000 workers and makes U-boat screws and aircraft propellers* Confirmation of this report is lacking*
Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper Zellstoffwerke Aschaffenburg (3) This is one of the main works of the Aschaffenburger Zellstoffwerke A.G. and manufactures cellulose and paper.
They employ some 3,000 workers* Buntpapierfabrik A.G. Aschaffenburg (-) This is a large scale paper works which specialised before the war particularly in the manufacture of dyed and coloured papers.
— — — o0*
- 18 -
ASCHERSLEBEN (Province Saxony; 51° 45' N. 11° JO' E: 500 miles: (40,000) Aschersleben lies 20 miles to the South of Magdeburg on the plain immediately to the North of the Hartz Mountains* It is on an East to West railway line, which connects it directly with Halberstadt, Berriburg, Kbthen and Dessau, the four other towns where important Junkers works are situated. The principal firm is Aschersleben is the Junkers factory described below. The normal peace-time industries include paper mills, engineering works, and the manufacture of woollen blankets. There are several brown coal mines in the neighbourhood, one of which, the Concordia, supplies fuel to the Aschersleben electric power station.
I
Public Utility Services
Power Station Aschersleben (j) The Concordia electric power station is a thermal plant with a capacity of 70 MW.
Aircraft and Aero Engines
Junkers Werke Aschersleben (1) This important factory of the Junkers concern concentrates mainly on the construction of fuselages for Ju.88*s. The production capacity is believed to synchronise with the production of wing sets at Halberstadt. The fuselages are despatched to Bernburg •for assembly. Ju. 52 fuselages are also produced at Aschersleben. According to ground intelligence, nearly 7,000 workers are employed.
Engineering and Armaments.
Deutsche Tiefbohr A.G. Aschersleben (2) This firm specialises in the manufacture and installation of well-boring machinery and mining equipment. Sone 800 workers were employed in 1939*
Billeter & KLunz Aschersleben (j) This firm, which has an iron and steel foundry, manufactures machine tools particularly planers and grinders. Some 600 workers are employed,
-— — -o0o— -- - A U E (Saxoqy)
50° J5‘ N. 12° 40* E: 555 miles: (26,000) Aue is 10 miles South East of Zwickau. In peace-time the chief products are small cutlery and tin plate. In addition to the three factories mentioned below, there are several other smaller metal working firms in Aue which it is believed have now been turned over to making S.A.A. and small arm components. Other industries include the manufacture of shirts and cotton garments.
/NON-FERROUS
- 19 -
Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrikation Sächsische Blaufarbenwerke A.G» Aue and Oberschlema (2) These are the largest German nickel smelting plants with a combine«! capacity of 2,000 tons of nickel per annum out of a total German capacity of 5,300 tons per annum. The plant can refine about 200 tons of cobalt annually.
Engineering and Armaments
Wellner Aue (2)
The Sächsische Metallwarenfabrik A. Wellner Söhne A.G. normally manufacture cutlery but are now converted to armament manufacture, and produce small arms components. They are reported to employ some 3,000 workers.
F.A. Lange Aue (2)
This firm employ some 1,500 workers and is now producing small arms components, land mines etc. Their peace-time products were chiefly tin plate and small cutlery.
Hiltmann & Lorenz Aue (3)
The works of the Maschinenfabrik Hiltmann & Lorenz A.G. specialise in iron and steel plate pressing machinery for all ranges of products, from steel helmets to heavy motor­ car chassis frames. The plant operates a subsidiary factory at Niederschlema near Aue with a foundry, a crucible furnace of 6 tons capacity, for castings requiring high tensile strength. Some 1,200 workers were employed before the war at the two works.
Hutschen-Reuter A.G. Aue (3)
This firm, which employed 300 workers before the war, is now specialising in M.G. belt sections for 25 mm anti-tank guns, in landmine casings,, and in metal containers for naval ammunition. *
/
Erdmann Kircheis Auehammer (3)
These works are tin plate stampers and pressers supplying in particular some of the smaller automobile factories. They employed some 1,000 workers before the war. It is believed that this number has been maintained and that the firm is now acting as a sub­ contractor of the Volkswagen works at Fallersleben. Auehammer is an outlying district of Aue. ---- o0o— —— ~
/AUERBACH
-2 0 -
A U E R B A C H (Saxony) 50° 30’ N. 12° 25* Es 55° miles: (20,000) Auerbach is 13 miles East of Plauen. The town normally specialises in brocades, tapestry m aterials and sim ilar products* There are no industries of importance.
A U G S B U R G (Bavaria) A8° 20» N. 10° 50’ E: 34° miles: (186,000) Augsburg is 3$ miles Northwest of Munich, and i s an important tr a f f ic centre and railway junction.
Apart from a few factories individually of considerable importance as producers of primary products for the armed forces there is no general industry of high p rio rity in th is area. liest of the large cotton weaving and spinning m ills have closed down due to shortage of raw m aterials and to a lesse r extent labour shortage.
T ransport at ion
Railway J unction Augsburg (2) Five important railway lines meet in Augsburg.
I t i s on the main lin e from Munich through Donauwörth to North-West Germany, and a second trunk lin e leads westward from Augsburg to Ulm.
To the South the main connection through South- West Bavaria to Lindau on Lake Constance, diverges from the Augsburg-Munich line South o f the town. A fu rth er branch leads North Eastward to Ingolstadt.
Railway Repair Shops Augsburg (2) These are large works which are situated to the South of the Mor e ils t r . Railway Statical.
They undertake the repair of a ll kinds of ro llin g stock.
Public U tility Services Städtische Gas Werke Augsburg (3) This is the main Augsburg Gas Works. It supplies the major part of Augsburg proper and most of the suburbs and in 193^ sales amounted to 2*60 m illion cubic feet of gas.
The Lechtal Werke A.G. Gersthofen (3) Operate at 25,000 kW. power station at Gersthofen under the name Lech-ElektrizitU ts- Werke A.G.
21
Aircraft and Aero Engines
Messerschmitt A.G. Haunstetterstr. (1+) These are the parent works of the Messerschmitt concern, and are situated adjacent to an airfield two miles South of the city centre, on the way to Haunstetten. They have been considerably enlarged during the war and have now five separate plants in this vicinity engaged on the design and production of their own types of fighter aircraft. More than 10,000 workers are employed. The Augsburg group of factories of the Messerschmitt company accounts for a large proportion of the total output of the 410 Messerschmitt type aircraft. The Augsburg works include the main research and experimental department, and are engaged on the design and production of the Messerschmitt prototypes.
Martin Schmittmer Schackstr. (2) This firm specialises in air-frames and aircraft body components. They are reported among other products, to manufacture a large proportion of the total requirements of pilot seats for the Me. 210’s and 410’s.
Engineering and Armaments
M.A.N. Maschinenfabrik Stadtbachstr. (1+) The Augsburg works of the M.A.N. Maschinen­ fabrik A.G. are the largest single plant of this concern. They are situated in the Northern part of the town. The M.A.N. are the leading German makers of Diesel engines, they produce all types and sizes of these, from complete U-boat Diesel propulsion units and diesels for other ships, to the types used in A.F.V’s and military transport.
It is believed that some 10,000 workers are now employed at the Augsburg plant, which is of the highest importance to the German war effort. In the course of the war this plant has been completely reorganised and considerably extended. New workshops have been erected to the west of the factory site and factories adjacent to the North and North-West are believed to have been incorporated into the M.A.N. complex. A variety of armaments components are believed to be made in the new workshops, whilst the acquired buildings are used as stores, dwellings and repair shops.
Keller & Knappich Ulmerstr. (1) The works of Keller & Knappich G,m.b.H, specialise in peace-time in the construction of welded and rivetted tanks and large containers, and in pressings and stampings, > ,
22 -
and metal tubing which were supplied to the Messerschmitt aircraft works. They are now reported also to make aero-engine and armament components, and to have a second plant engaged on components of U-boat Diesel engines. Two-thirds of the total of 5,000 workers employed by this firm are said to be engaged in this second plant, which is of recent construction and partly built under­ ground but within the old factory site.
Eberle & Cie. A.G. Pfersee (5) This firm specialises in the manufacture of watch springs, small band saws, and similar products, and is one of the leading firms in this branch.
Augsburger Federnfabrik Bleichstr. (jj This firm, which normally manufactures light springs of all kinds, is now reported to be engaged mainly on components for aero engines.
Zahnr&derfabrik Hinderiburgstr. (2) TheZahnr&derfabrik Augsburg A.G-. vorm.
Joh. Renk, are makers of transmission units, gear boxes, and axles. Their works are in the South Western quarter of the town. They employed approximately 1,000 workers before the war.
L.A. Riedinger Ottostr. (-) The Riedinger Bronzewarenfabrik is situated close to the M.A.N. works, and formerly specialised in lamp fittings and similar bronze products. It is believed that this factory has now been incorporated into the M.A.N. complex.
Chemicals and Explosives
F.B. Silbermann Haunstetterstr. (3) These chemical works are equipped with large scale testing and research laboratories, and employ some 2,000 workers. It was reported in 1942 that highly secret tests of a new type of poison gas and other chemical warfare materials were being carried out in these works. The works is believed to be fully active.
Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper Ballonfabrik Austr. (2) The Ballonfabrik Augsburg, which was formerly known as A. Riedinger, is reported to be the largest balloon factory in Germany and to /employ
- 23 -
employ seme 4,000 workers.
Baumwollspinnerei a. Stadtbach A.G.
Augsburger Buntweberei Spinnerei & Weberei Pfersee A.G-.
Stadtbachstr* ) Wolfzahnstr. ) (-) Augsburgerstr. j
These three firms are the most important of some twenty textile mills situated in Augsburg. No firm evidence regarding their present activity is available but it is believed that all three factories are now incorporated into the M.A.N. complex.
AUGUSTENTHAL (Westphalia) 51° 27' N. 7° 40' E: 335 miles (1,000) Two miles south of Aliena, the small town of Augustenthal only has some 200 inhabitants but possesses a wire-drawing plant (a) and (b) a steel works said to be producing special steel for precision tools ball-bearings, and cash­ steel rods and (c) a wire-drawing plant also making spiral small springs for instruments, and small screws.
Engineering & Armaments 1) Ernst Selve 2) R. & H. Plate 3) Friedrich Boesner
(3)
24
BADEN-BADEN (Baden)
48 45* N. 8° 15* Es 420 miles: (33,000)
Baden-Baden lies some 20 miles South West of Karlsruhe. It is primarily a health resort, and has no industries of importance.
-----o0o-----
BAD GODESBERG (Rhineland)
50 45* N. 7 10» E: 320 miles: (32,000) <
Bad Godesberg lies a few miles to the South of Bonn on the main railway to Koblenz. The town is chiefly noted as a health resort, and apart from a few small engineering works, has no industries of importance.
----- oOo-----
BAD HOMBURG (Hesse Nassau)
50° 15’ N. 8° 35* E: 390 miles: (19,000) Bad Homburg is situated approximately 10 miles North of Frankfurt a. Main, on a branch railway from Frankfurt to Friedberg.
The town is chiefly a health resort, and apart from the important rubber works mentioned below, contains no industries worthy of note.
Rubber and Tyres
Peters-Werke Bad Homburg (2)
The Peters-Pneu-Renova-Werke specialise in the repair and retreading of tyres, and normally employ several hundred workers. The works are of considerable importance in this branch.
----- oOo-----
25
BAD KREUZNACH (Rhineland)
49° 50’ N. 7° 50’ E: 370 miles: (JO,500) Bad Kreuznach is in the valley of the Nahe, and on the main railway from Cologne through Bingen to Saarbrücken. It is a Junction from which branch lines lead to Kaiserslautern, Neustadt and Mannheim.
The town is well-known as a health resort, but contains a number of minor industries, including chemicals, leather and engineering. Apart from the two works mentioned below, none of these are of individual importance.
Engineering and Armaments
Seitz-Werke Bad Kreuznach (J) The Seitz-Werke G»m.b. H. normally employ several hundred workers on the manufacture of filters, weighing machines, and all types of machinery for the wine industry.
They are probably now making small arms components and other war products suitable for this type of plant.
I
Leather
Ho the A.Gr. Bad Kreuznach (-) The Lederwerke Rothe A.G. manufacture all types of leather products and normally employ some J00 workers.
---- oOo----
BAD OEYNHAUSEN (Westphalia) 52° 10* N. 8° 50’ E: J85 miles: (15,000)
Bad Oeynhausen is on the main railway from Osnabrück to Hannover. The town contains no important industries apart from that mentioned below.
Engineering and Armaments
Eisenwerk Bad Oeynhausen (J) The Eisenwerk Weserhütte A.G. employ some 2,000 workers on the manufacture of all types of dredging and excavating machinery.
---- oOo---—
26
B A M B E R G (Bavaria)
49° 50» N. 10° 55* E: * 495 miles: (57,000) Bamberg is on the main railway from North Germany through Coburg to Nürnberg and Munich. I t is JO miles North of Nürnberg. An important branch line leads Northwest from Bamberg to Schweinfurt. The town contains a number of small industries, including engineer?-ng works, te x tile s , and leather goods, but none are of importanne.
Transportation
Railway Repair Shops Bamberg ,(j) These medium sized railway workshops are engaged on the rep air and maintenance of goods wagons.
Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper Kalikofabrik Mussstr. (-) The Bamberger Kalkiofabrik A.G. (which was formerly owned by the Winterbotham Book Cloth Co. , Ltd. of Manchester) employs some J00 workers and manufactures calico.
——-oOo—— - BARM EN
See under Wuppertal.
——-oOo——
B A S D O R F (Brandenburg) 53° 5' N. 13° 20' Es 580 mile»: (10,000) Basdorf is a small settlem ent 10 miles North of B erlin, on a branch railway line. Apart from the important works mentioned below, Basdorf has no other industries.
A ircraft and Aero Engines B.M.W.
Basdorf (1)
These a irc ra ft works were formerly known as the Brandenburgische Motorenwerke G»m.b. H. but have now been taken over by the B.M.W. concern of Munich. Some 10,000 workers are reported to be employed on the manu­ facture of high powered rad ial a ir ­ colled ae^o-enginas.
-------oOo-------
27
B A U T Z E N (Saxony)
51 10* N. 14 30’ E: 6j0 m iles: (42,000) Bautzen is in the Eastern area of Saxony, 30 miles East of Dresden and on the main railway from Dresden to G örlitz. There are a number of engineering firm s, one of which is of considerable importance and the town has also several te x tile fa c to rie s, and a paper m ill which is mentioned below.
Engineering and Armaments Waggon Fabrik Neusche-Promenade (2) The Waggon und Maschinen Fabrik A.G. vorm. Busch belongs to the Linke- Hoffmann concern of Breslau. The company manufactures a ll types of railway wagons and e le ctric loco­ motives, as w ell as lo rrie s and buses.
The plant includes an iron foundry which produces railway couplings and malleable castings. The annual
•
capacity is reported to be 3,000 goods wagons, 500 passenger coaches, 1,000 lo rrie s , 2,000 automatic couplings*, and 250 e le ctric locomotives?1 Some 2,000 workers were employed in 1939» (» Narrow gauge type.) Johne-Werk Schftfferstr. (3) The Johne-Werk A.G. employ some 500 workers on the manufacture of machinery fo r the paper, rubber and ce llu lo id industries.
Nowak Martin- (3) Mutschmannstr.
August Nowak A.G. are engaged on the production of wheels, axles, and other components ch ie fly fo r horse drawn vehicles. They are also reported to be experimenting in the use of p la stics. This factory employs several hundred workers.
T extiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper.
Papier-Fabriken A. G. Bautzen (-) The Vereinigts Bautzner Papier- Fabriken A.G. have their main works in Bautzen, and a branch facto iy at Obergurig in Saxony. The company manufactures a ll types of paper and paper products, and employs some 800 workers.
28
BAUTZEN (contd. ) Food Stuffs * Zuckerfabrik Bautzen The Oberlausitzer Zuckerfabrik A. G., whose parent works are at Löbau in Saxony, have a sugar refinery a t Bautzen, where several hundred workers are employed.
------oOo——-
B A Y R E U T H (Bavaria) 49° 55' N. 11° 35' Es 525 m iles: (45,000) Bayreuth is 35 miles North East of Nürnberg and is a junction fo r several branch lines serving the d is tr ic t of Northeastern Franconia. The town has a few te x tile works, of which the largest is mentioned below, but has otherwise no industries of importance.
I t has been reported that the Messerschmitt company has two small branch factories a t Bayreuth engaged on the development of new types of a irc ra ft but firm evidence of such a development is lacking.
T extiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper Weberei Tunnelstr. (-) The Mechanische Baumwoll Spinnerie und Weberei A.G. Bayreuth, is a cotton spinning and weaving m ill in pre-war days employing some 1,400 workers.
-----------0O 0-----------
B E L G A R D (Pomerania) 54° N. 16° E: 700 m iles: (17,000) Belgard is on the main railway from S te ttin to Danzig. A branch from Belgard serves the small coastal town of Kolberg, and Belgard is favourably situated to form a railway junction for the coastal settlem ents on th is stre tc h of the B altic. The town i ts e lf has no industries of importance.
Public U tility Services Kraftwerk Belgard (3) This thermal power statio n is on the M.E.W. system, and has a capacity of 32 MW.
— ------0O0— —
29
B E N R A T H (Rhineland) See under Düsseldorf. ------ oOo------
B E N S B E R G (Rhineland) 50° 55’ N. 7° 10* E: 320 miles: (16,000) Bensberg lie s at the end of a branch railway some 12 miles East of Cologne. Its principal activity is concerned with the lead and zinc mines in the Sauerland d istrict, on the Western edge of which the town is situated.
Non-ferrous metals Berzelius Metallhutten G»m.b.H. , (3) Controlled by the Metall­ gesellschaft A.G. of Frankfort/ Main this firm had a capacity of 18,000 tons per annum of zinc metal.
— --- oOo------
B E N S H E IM (Hesse) 49° 40’ N. 8° 45* E: 405 miles: (16,000) Bensheim lies on the main railway midway between Darmstadt and Heidelberg, and a branch line leads from Bensheim to Worms. The town is chiefly noted as a fru it growing centre. I t contains a few small paper and woodworks, none of which are worthy of note. _™.o0o——-
B E R G E D" ORF (Hamburg) 50° 30* N. 10° 50’ E: 460 miles: (20,000) Bergedorf is adjacent to the Vierlender, a large market garden suburb of Hamburg and is situated 8 miles from the city on the wain railway to Berlin. I t is the chief centre for this vegetable market. Bergedorf contains a few minor engineering firms and a small asbestos factory, but hone are of individual importance.
- 30 -
B E R G H E IM (Rhineland) 50° 57* N. 6° 40* E: 295 miles: ’ (13,300) This town lie s about 12 miles due West of Cologne. I t embraces the neighbouring villages of Nieder- and Oberaussem, Kenten, and Quadrath-Ichendorf. I ts industry is small, with the exception of the Fortuna and Nieder*- Aussem power plants, the Fortuna mine, and an alumina plant a t Kenten-Bergheim.
Public U tility Services “Fortuna" Kraftwerk Quadrath (1) This plant, owned by R.W.E. but controlled by “Rheinisches E lektrizitätsw erk im Braun­ kohlenrevier A.G. “, consists of two generating statio n s, Fortuna I and I I. The plants have a capacity of 65 MW and 140 MW per annum res­ pectively. Brown coal is supplied from the adjacent Fortuna mine.
Nieder-Aussem Kraftwerk Neideraussem (2) This generating station, owned 'Ey the Braun­ kohlen u. B rikett-Fabrikation of Cologne, has a capacity of 51 MW.
Solid Fuels “Fortuna" Briquette Works Quadrath (3) These two briquette works are adjacent to the Fortuna power stations and are owned by the , Rheinische A.G. fü r Braunkohlenbergbau, u.
B rikettfabrxkation. They had in 1937 a daily output of 1,800 tons of briq u ettes. “Fortuna“ Brown Coal Mine Between Oberhaussem and Quadrath (3) This mine,, belonging to the Rheinische A. G. fü r Braunkohlenbergbau u. B rikettfabrikation, had, in 1937, a daily output of 10,000 tons of brown coal. Workers a t th at time in the mine and briquette works to ta lle d some 700.
- 31 -
BERGHEIM (contd. )
Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication
Aluminium Industrie A.G. (Martinswerk)
Kenten-Bergheim (1)
This company, Swiss-owned, but controlled since the war by VAWAG, is one of the largest plants of its kind in Germany, Its annual capacity of alumina as per September 1943 was estimated to be 140,000 tons or nearly of the total German production,-and its workers are estimated to number some 4,000.
BERGISCH-GLADBACH (Rhineland)
51° N. 7° 15* E: 325 miles; (22,000)
Bergisch-Gladbach is situated on a branch railway some 12 miles East of Mühlheim. The town contains a few small engineering works, in addition to the firms mentioned below, and there are a number of paper and cardboard manufacturers, none of which are of importance.
Engineering and Armaments
Hager & Weidmann Jacobstr. (-)
The engineering works of Hager & Weidmann A.G, normally employ some 200 workers on the manufacture of - generators, boilers, ovens, and all types of welding machinery.
Berger & Co. G*m.b.H. Bergisch- (-)
•
Gladbach
This machine factory, whose equipment includes an iron foundry, manufactures machinery and installations of all types for the rubber, washing and brick industries, and particularly fettling shop equipment. The company normally employs some 300 workers.
- 32 -
B E R L I N
52° 30* N. 13° 20» E: 580 m iles: (4,400,000)
G eneral In tro d u c tio n
B e rlin , th e c a p ita l o f th e German R eich , and th e t h i r d la r g e s t c ity in th e w orld, i s n o t only th e p o l i t i c a l and economic adm inis­ t r a t i v e c e n tre o f Germany, b u t ranks a lso as th e most im portant in d u s tr ia l and m anufacturing c ity on th e C ontinent of Europe.
The suburbs and b u ilt-u p a re a extends from E a st to West fo r some 20 m ile s, and from N orth to South approxim ately 17 m iles. The a d m in istra tiv e boundaries have been extended by th e in c lu sio n o f surrounding d i s t r i c t s to give a t o t a l a re a o f 345 square m iles.
The c h ie f in d u s tr ia l a re a s l i e f i r s t l y , to th e N o rth -w est, including Spandau, S iem en stad t, Wedding, T eg el, and R einickendorf, and secondly, to th e South and S o u th -east in clu d in g M arienfelde, Tempelhof, and J o h a n n ista l. There a re o th e r w e ll-e s ta b lis h e d in d u s tr ia l a re a s , such as L ichtenberg and Schöneberg, which a re re s p e c tiv e ly in th e e a s te rn and so u th ern q u a rte rs o f th e c ity .
F u rth e r in d u s tr ia l e x te n sio n i s ta k in g place in v a rio u s o u tly in g p o rtio n s o f th e a d m in is tra tiv e a re a .
The course o f th e r i v e r S p ree, which' i s n a v ig a b le , runs approx­ im ately from S o u th -e a st to N orth-w est through th e c e n tre o f th e c ity .
At Spandau i t jo in s the H avel, which flow s from N orth to South along th e w estern bo rd er o f B e rlin . The Teltow c a n a l, which leav es the Spree near Treptow and ru n s through th e Southern o u ts k ir ts o f G reater B e rlin , jo in s the Havel n e a r Potsdam and forms a lin k to r e lie v e th e w ater-borne t r a f f i c through th e c e n tre o f th e c ity .
G reat use has been made o f th e waterways around B e rlin in order to connect th e c a p ita l w ith th e E lbe and the Oder, Large in la n d harbours have been co n stru cted . The most im portant o f which i s the W esthafen, where 70 larg e sh ip s can be loaded sim ultaneously. The W esthafen i s connected w ith th e Spree and w ith th e H avel, which i t jo in s a t Spandau. From th e Havel (N orth-w est o f B e rlin ) ship can als have been b u i l t g iv in g d ir e c t access in th e E a st to the O der, and in the West to th e Elbe. By th is means navigable waterways connect B e rlin d ir e c tly w ith S t e t t i n and th e B a ltic , and w ith Hamburg.
The main railw ay a rte ry between W estern and N o rth -eastern Europe ru n s through B e rlin . There are th re e la rg e railw ay s ta tio n s on t h i s E a st to West lin e . In a d d itio n main lin e s r a d ia te from f iv e o th e r term in al railw ay s ta tio n s to a l l p a r ts of Germany. The lo c a l and suburban t r a f f i c i s served by th e e le c tr ic S ta d t- und Ringbahn, th e extensive network o f which extends over th e whole area. T his is supplemented by the la rg e system o f th e Hoch- und Untergrundbahn, which runs p a rtly underground and p a r tly as an ele v a te d ra ilw a y , and ’ by th e tramway and bus se rv ic e s.
A ll th e le a d in g firm s have a d m in istra tiv e o ffic e s in B e rlin .
These a re la rg e ly co n cen trated in th e c e n tra l c ity a re a between A lexanderplatz and th e E a ste rn end o f U nter den Linden, and a lso in the neighbourhood o f the Potsdamnerp la tz .
Running South from the W estern end o f U nter den Linden is the W ilhelm strasse, in which are s itu a te d th e C hancellery, th e War O ffic e , the A ir M in istry and o th e r Government departm ents.
/T he
— 32a “
BERLIN (contd.)
The principal shopping centres of Berlin, which contain several large department stores, are Leipzigerstrasse, Alexanderplatz, and Tauentzienstrasse, in Charlottenburg.
Industries ' '
»
.
The firmly established and significant position held by the industries of Berlin within the German productive machine is primarily due to their scope and diversity, both of which have been further developed during the war.
The electro-technical industry (including radio) s t i l l maintains its important and leading position and is represented by large firms of world-wide repute such as the A. E. G., Siemens & Halske A. G., Siemens Schuckert A.G., and Telefunken Ges. fur Drahtlose Telegraphie m.b.H., Osram G.nub.H., and others.
The general engineering industry is also of substantial import­ ance, as is shown by the well-known firms engaged in it, such as Rheinmetall Borsig A.G., Ambi-Budd Presswerke G.nub.H., Deutsche Industriewerke A. G., Berliner Maschinenbau A. G.‘ (vormals L. Schwartzkopff), and Daimler-Benz A.G.; it. is , in fact, Berlin’s second-largest branch of industry. The aircraft industry is represented by B.M.W., Dornier, He ink el. and Focke-Wulf, and general engineering by numerous makers of precision tool and of precision and optical instruments.
Berlin’ s chemical, clothing, and food industries, are also of more than local importance.
Industrial Areas
The chief industrial areas are located outside the Ringbahn, along the water and railway routes. These routes are arranged in three main b e lts:- the river Spree and the canals associated with it; the railway which encircles the outskirts of the compact built-up area, i . e ., the Ringbahn; and an outer ring of conmunications which consist of the Havel and Tegel See to the West, the Teltow canal from Potsdam to Kopenick to the South, and the Industrie Bahn to the North from Tegel to Lichtenberg.
An important feature of the three outstanding industrial areas is that there .are only small residential areas in their immediate vicin ity. In order of importance these are:- (1) Spandau, Charlottenburg, and Siemenstadt.
This west-central part of Berlin is of the highest importance..
Here there are very big blocks of factory buildings and also a special port. Among others, the electrical equipment and cable * works of Siemens & Halske A.G., Siemens Schuckert A.G., A.E.G. .
Turbinenfabrik, the Ges. fur Elektrische Unternehmungen L. Loewe A.G., Osram G.m.b.H., and the B.M.W. are located there. The second and third largest of the BEWAG power stations are also in this area. (2) Treptow and Schöneweide» The manufacture of elect ideal equipment of a ll kinds is pre­ dominant within this area, and, although the A.E.G. has its largest individual plant at Brunnenstrasse, Wedding, the three most important electrical equipment and cable works of the company are to be found here. The most important of Berlin’ s non-ferrous metal plants and the main works of the important Accumulateren Fabrik A.G. (A. F.A.)
/are
- 33 -
BERLIN (contd.)
are located in the Schöneweide district. There are other engin­ eering works, motor vehicle and metal works. The largest of the BEWAG power stations is at Rummelsburg, near the Treptow area. (3) Tegel, Wittenau, and Reinickendorf.
Important engineering and armament-production plants are to be found here. The most prominent of these are the Dornier and the Heinkel air-craft-components factories, the Argus aero-engine factory, Maschinenfabrik Prometheus G.nub.H., and the Deutsche Waffen- und Munitions- Fabriken A.G-.
To the North there are many snail and scattered factories, the chief of which are at Lichtenberg, where Siemens Planiawerke and a number of other engineering woiks are located. To the South, at Mariendorf, Tempelhof and Britz, the chief factories lie on the South side of the Tempelhof airfield. Industries are also to be found on the Eastern outskirts of Neukolln.
The suburban areas, most of which lie far outside Berlin, have been developed mainly during the last twenty years. As a rule they are largely residential, but in some cases industrial development has taken place. The greatest extensions have been made along the railways to the North-west towards Hennigsdorf and Oranienburg; to the North-east to Bernau: to the East beyond Mahlsdorf: to the South-east beyond Kopenick to Wildau; to the South to Lichtenrade: and to the South-west around the South of the Havel See to Potsdam.
Transportation
a) West Harbour West Harbour (1) b) East Harbour East Harbour (1) c) Spandau-South Harbour Spandau-South Harbour (3)
Berlin is second only to Duisburg as an inland port. It has accomodation for vessels up to 1,000 tons and is connected by canal with most parts of Germany. The most important of the nine large transhipment harbours of Berlin are the East and West Harbours, The latter is the largest and most modern and consists of three basins with a granary, customs sheds, * and ten warehouses. The East Harbour is a development of the river bank with warehouses, granary, cold-storage plant, etc., (see also under "Foodstuffs").
/ Marshalling Yard
- 33a -
BERLIN (contd. )
Marshalling Yard Tempelhof
Passenger Stations
Goods Yards
Tempelhof marshalling yard and the main Potsdamer and Anhalter passenger stations and their respective goods depots, carriage repair workshops, and loco depots, extend South from the inner city to Tempelhof suburb. The Anhalter station is East of the Potsdamer station, and is the terminus for services operating to Dresden, Halle, Leipzig, Frankfurt a/M, Bavaria.
Potsdamer station is the terminal point for main line service to Köln and the Rhineland via Magdeburg and Wuppertal.
Tempelhof goods dApot with its adjacent railway facilities is located on the South side of the circular railway known as the "Ringbahn" and is one of a number of such goods depots serving the inner city.
Tempelhof marshalling yard has a throughout capacity of 3,000 wagons per 24 hours; during the inter-war period it was working at 8 % of capacity, but under war conditions it is probably working to full capacity and may be regarded as one of the vital rail targets of the Berlin area.
The main routes on which the target lies arej- to Dresden, Prague and Vienna to the South; to Leipzig, Halle, Mannheim to the South-west; and to Magdeburg, and Northern France (via Köln) to the West-South-West.
Railway Repair Shops Tempelhof The main locomotive depot, and large railway workshops were reported to employ some 5,000 people during the inter-war period. As a^ locomotive centre the workshops were. reported to possess a large capacity and to be equipped for the handling of passenger, freight and switching engines. Facilities for coach and wagon repair are said to be of medium capacity only. Approximately two-thirds of workshops area have been gutted as results of air attacks.
(1)
Marshalling Yard and Railway Repair Grunewald Shops
This target includes the Westkreuz junction as well as a switching and rectifier station (junction of Stadtbahn eiid Ringbahn) and the electricity distribution station for these railways. The repair shops are engaged on goods-wagon and passenger-coach work and are believed to employ 1,700 workers.
/Putlit zstrasse
- 33b -
BERLIN ( contd. )
Putlitzstrasse, Lehrter and Spreeufer Moabit (1) goods stations and Lehrter passenger station.
This is an important goods station with large storage facilities including grain silos and general goods stores (see also under "Foodstuffs”).
Schlesischer station sidings, Schlesischer- (1) workshops and goods yards. Bahnhof This is one of the principal passenger stations of Berlin. The workshops are engaged in the repair of goods wagons and are believed to employ 2,300 workers. This target area includes the Ostkreuz station (junction of Stadtbahn and Ringbahn) and the electricity distribution centre for these railway s„
Friedrichstrasse Station Friedrichstrasse (1) The Friedrichstrasse min- line passenger station and underground station complex lies in. the heart of the city. It is one of the principal passenger stations of Berlin. The area covered by this objective includes the crossing; of the Stadtbahn (East-West electric railway) over the river Spree, and beneath it the North-South Underground Station and the North South city line station. . The latter line connects the terminal points of Stettiner station to the North with Potsdamer and Anhalter stations to the South.
Marshalling Yard, Goods Station and Johannisthal (2) workshops Schöneweide The Johannisthal marshalling yards have a capacity of 4,200 wagons per 24 hours, handling traffic from the South-east, Cracow, Breslau and Gleiwitz. Repair of rolling stock of all types is carried out in the railway workshops. ' The goods station which forms a small part of the target area has large storage facilities.
Railway Repair Shops Berlin- (2) Schöneweide
Repair and maintenance of electric motor vehicles for the Berliner Stadtbahn is carried out at these works by some 3,000 workers.
/Marshalling Yard
- 33c -
BERLIN (contd.)
Marshalling Yard Rummelsburg (3)
Rummelsburg Marshalling Yard, has a capacity for 2,800 wagons in 24 hours. The yard, is of primary importance, standing at a point where heavy traffic to and from the Northern parts of the eastern front comes into the ■ Berlin suburban area. It is also an important transhipment centre.
Marshalling Yard . Pankow (3)
2,700 wagons per 24 hours is the normal capacity of the Pankow Marshalling Yards handling traffic for all points North of the city, Stettin and the Baltic coast.
Underground Railway Workshops Wedding (3)
This is a secondary repair and maintenance works of the Berlin Underground Railway system.
|
Gorlitzer Station Neukolln (3)
The Gorlitzer passenger station is of some importance being the only sizeable station in this area.
Westend Goods Station Charlottenburg (3)
The Westend goods station includes to the North a number of main lines converging on Berlin’s centre.
Marshalling Yard and Goods Station Lichtenberg (3)
2,000 wagons can be handled at the Lichtenberg marshalling yards every 24 hours. Traffic is handled for Danzig and East Prussia.
Goods Station and Locomotive Sheds Gesundbrunnen (3) This target consists of the Gesundbrunnen Junction, the Nordbahn Goods Yards, and a number of locomotive sheds.
Stettiner Station Berlin-Nord (3) The Stettiner Bahnhof is one of Berlin’s principal passenger and goods stations.
Underground Railway Charlottenburg (2) (Ruhleben)
The Charlottenburg (Ruhleben) station is the principal repair depot of the Berlin Under­ ground railway system. The station also includes a storage depot of considerable capacity.
•
/Alexander Platz.
- 33d -
BERLIN (contd.)
Alexander Platz Alexanderplatz (3) This target consists of a group of , passenger stations.
Tramway Depot Wedding: Between (3) Ufer and Gott­ sched station.
This is the central repair depot in Berlin.
Working in co-operation with the depot at Wittenau, all major repairs can be handled here.
Tramway Depot Wittenau; (3) Between Cyclopstr. and Hermsdorferstr.
The Wittenau depot is engaged on the assembly of tram tracks, major repairs and reconstruction of trams and buses.
The depot includes the main stores of the Berliner Verkehrs Betriebe.
Tramway Depot Wedding (3) Müllerstr.
The Wedding tram depot is capable of housing 200 trams.
Tramway Depot Britz, (3) Gradestr.
This is another large depot of the Berliner Verkehrs Betriebe.
Omnibus Depot Treptow (3) The Treptow depot is solely engaged on the repair and maintenance of buses. Some 2.000 workers are normally employed.
Tramway Depot Lichtenberg (3)
This is one of the main repair centres of the Berlin Tram company.
Tramway Depot Britz (3) The Britz depot of the Berlin Tram Company is mainly engaged on the repair and main­ tenance of motive power units.
- u -
PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICES
I, ELECTRICITY SUPPLY
Abbreviations
BKL (BE.7AG).... ..Berliner Kraft- und Licht (BEWAG)- A.G.
EWAG............. Elektrowerke A.G.
MEW. ............. MÄrkisches Elektrizitätswerk A. G.
ESA.............. Elektrizitätswerk Südwest A.G.
General
The city is supplied from external sources chiefly by the EWAG and the MEW systems. The BKL (BEWAG) con­ trols all the main power stations in the city. The total capacity of the generating stations is 1,250 MW.
External Supply
There are two main outside systems of supply to the city. The first, the EWAG system, supplies current from GoIpa-Zschornewitz and Trattendorf. These lines enter Berlin at Spandau and at Rummelsburg and thence are linked up to the BKL (BEWAG) system. Two lines come from Trattendorf; one skirts the northern suburbs and enters at Spandau, the other connects with BKL (BEWAG) system at Friedrichsfelde.
The other is the MEW system, which encircles Berlin and introduces current from the power stations at Finkenheerd, Finow, and Hennigsdorf.
Berliner Kraft- und Licht (BEWAG)- A.G. "Deutsche Edison" was founded in 1883 and in the following year was granted a concession to supply electrical current to part of the city of Berlin. This concession was transferred to the Städtische Elektrizi­ tätswerke on its formation. Later, this company became the Berliner Elektrizitätswerke (BEW), and the concession was extended to cover the whole of the city of Berlin.
In 1915 the city itself took over the direction of the firm under the name Städtische Elektrizitätswerke Berlin (STEW), but this was again altered in 1923 to Berliner Städtische Elektrizitätswerke Akt. Ges. ( BEWAG).
In 1931 the Berliner Kraft- und Licht-Aktiengesell­ schaft (BKL) was formed to administer the electrical installations owned directly by the city and those owned by BEWAG. The BEWAG capital was transferred to the new company and two other Berlin companies - Elektrowerke A.G. (EWAG) and Preussische Elektrizitäts Aktiengesellschaft- also became shareholders of the new company.
Finally, in 1934, BEWAG and BKL were completely amalgamated to form the present Berliner Kraft- und Licht (BEWAG) - A.G.
In 1938, BKL (BEWAG) - the new company - acquired the firm of Elektrizitätswerk Südwest A. G. (ESA) and so widened its territorial interests to Schöneberg, Wilmersdorf and
- 35 -
BERLIN (contd.)
Public Utilities (Electricity)
Schmargendorf. In the same year, as a result of an agreement made in 1928. it acquired from Mftrkisches Elektrizitätswerk A.G.(MEW) territorial interests in Dahlem, Lankwitz, Lichtenrade, Mariendorf, Südende, and Tempelhof, Thus BKL (BEWAG) acquired the interests in the whole of the city as far as the small outlying districts of Wannsee and Buch. The company claims that this is the largest system of electrical manufacture and distribution in any one city in the world.
BKL (BEWAG-) power station Klingenberg (1+) This is the largest of the thermal power stations owned by the Berliner Kraft- und Licht (BEWAG) -A.G. , which supply electricity to the Berlin area. Built in 1926/28, it operates on base load and has an in­ stalled capacity of 270 MW. but is designed for an ultimate capacity of 540 MW. It is situated on the North bank of the river Spree in the South-east of the city on a site of 50 acres; the main control room for the BKL (BEWAG ) system is in the nine-storied office block which also houses large water tanks on its top floor.
From a JO kV switch house at least 48 three-phase . 30 kV underground cables are operated in pairs and are connected to different substations in the Berlin area. There is also a JO kV connection to the adjacent 81 MW, Rummelsburg station.
BKL ( BEWAG) power station Berlin-West (1+) This station is the second largest of the BKL (BEWAG) system and has an installed capacity of 228 MW, Built in 1929/1932, it is situated on the North bank of the river Spree in the western area of the city near the Siemens works at Siemenstadt. It was originally operated mainly to supply part of the Berlin day load, the night load being supplied by the Klingenberg station and by long-distance transmission from the large brown-coal-fired stations at Golpa-Zschomewitz, Trattendorf, Lauta, Finkenheerd, and elsewhere. The small Unterspree power station is situated 300 yards to the South-west, on the bank of the Spree. The main supply at 30 kV from the station is through underground cables to the Berlin city network via the JO kV switch house. Supplies are also given direct to the nearby Siemens works. In addition to auxiliary supplies some small local supplies are probably given at 6, J kV via the 6. J kV switch house.
BKL (BEWAG) power station . Charlottenburg (1) This thermal power station, owned by BKL (BEWAG), has an installed capacity of 109 MW. Built, in 1900, it was completely reconstructed in 1925 in two sections, of which one, with a capacity of 59 MW. , operates on base load, while the other plant, which has a capacity of
e
d 50 MW. , meets the peak load. It is situated in the western area of the city, on the North bank of the
- 36 -
BERLIN ( contd.) Public Utilities (Electricity)
BKL (BEWAG) power station Charlottenburg (1) (contd.)
river Spree. There is a 30 kV substation con­ taining twelve 6/30 kV transformers of a total capacity of 116 MW. and one 30/3 kV inter-bus transformer of 8 MW. capacity. Local supplies are connected by underground cables to Spandau, Knie, the Simens works, Moabit, and to the nearby 1Ö0 kV. substation. The 100 kV substation connected the Berlin 30 kV underground cable system with the 100 kV transmission system. One 100 kV line goes to Spandau, 6 miles to the North­ west, and one to Moabit, from there continuing to Friedrichsfelde substation (9 miles East of Charlottenburg). The electrical output is supplied to Berlin. Steam is also supplied at 281 lbs/sc. in. for a district-heating system.
BKL (BEWAG) power station Rummelsburg (1)
This station is situated in Ruirmelsburg, a suburb in the South-east of Berlin, on the North bank of the river Spree within J mile of the Klingenberg station and has an installed capacity of 81 MV.
A 100/30 kVA substation close to the generating plant transforms 100 kV supplies from the EWAG grid to 30 kV for local distribution. One 100 kV double-circuit line goes to the Friedrichsfelde substation, 4 miles to the North, and one to Golpa-Zschomewitz. The substation serves for local distribution at 30 kV rather than for supplying electricity externally.
A 6/30 kV substation connects the 100/30 kV sub­ station to the generating station, and contains at least two 6/30 kV transformers each of 18 MW. capacity; it connects the generating station to the 30 kV grid of the Berlin area and with the 100/30 kV substation it also serves for local distribution at 6 kV.
BKL (BEWAG) power station Moabit (2) This is one of the oldest stations of the BKL (BEWAG) system supplying the Berlin area and has an installed capacity of 81 MW. It is operated for peak load and standby purposes. It is situated in the North-west central district on the Schiffahrts-Kanal and consists of 2 parts; these are composed of a large number of reconditioned old units or replacements, which made identification of plant difficult.
A substation for 100/30 kV- steps down the supplies received through the 100 kV grid for distribution over the Berlin 30 kV grid. The substation is partly open air and partly in the old engine house; it contains at least 5 transformers each of 16 MW.
Long distance 100 kV lines pass to Spandau, 7 miles distant, and to the Friedrichsfelde substation, 8 miles East of Moabit. A 6/30 kV substation gives supplies to the Berlin 30 kV grid. Local distribution is also at 6 kV.
37 -
BERLIN ( contd. ) Public Utilities (Electricity)
BKL (BEWAG) power station Wilmersdorf (2) This station on the BKL (BEWAG) system is situated, at Wilmersdorf, a South-western suburb of Berlin close to the Rudolsthd ter st rasse, and has an installed, capacity of 62 MM.This station was built by ESA in about 1905 and supplies the South-western area of Berlin. It is believed that the Wilmersdorf station is now used by BKL (BEWAG) for standby purposes only. An A.C./D.C. converter plant is attached to the station. The city of Berlin is supplied at 6.6. kV and at lower voltages, and supplies are also given to the underground railways.
It is possible that this station has been connected by BKL (BEWAG) to the 30 kV Berlin grid and that a 30/6 kV substation has been added to serve as a local distribution centre.
BKL (BEWAG) power station Spandau (1) This station on the BKL (BEWAG) system is situated on the Havel See near Spandau, a North-west suburb of Berlin and has an installed capacity of 56 MW.
The generating plant is used for standby and peak load only.
One double ciruit line goes to Trattendorf, one to Brandenburg (there connecting to Golpa- Zschomewitz and Diesdorf), and one to Charlottenburg.
There is a 100 kV connection to Henningsdorf (5 miles to the North).
Local supplies are given at 6 kV, and to the Berlin grid at 30 kV.
This station contains one of the main substations in Berlin. It has at least two 100/30 kV transformers, each of 16 MW. capacity and transforms the supplies received from the 100 kV grid to 30 kV for local distribution.
It is the terminus of the 220 kV line which was partially constructed before the war and is now probably completed; starting at Brauweiler, the line reaches Spandau via Koepehenwerk, Bielefeld, Lehrte, Harbke, Diesdorf (Magdeburg), and Brandenburg; a distance of 385 miles by this route.
EWAG switch station Friedrichsfelde (2) This important switch station is owned, by EWAG and is situated on the east side, of the city. Two 100 kV lines from Golpa-Zschomewitz and Trattendorf power stations pass to Berlin. It is also connected to the Moabit and Rummelsburg transforming stations.
The elimination of this station would seriously affect the city*s external supplies and it is, there­ fore, an important target.
- 37a -
BERLIN (contd. )
Public Utilities (Electricity)
BKL ( BEWAG) power station Unter spree (3) This station on the BKL ( BEWAG) system is situated on the South bank of the river Spree opposite to the Berlin-West station, and has an installed capacity of 36 MW. It supplies the underground railway system.
BKL (BEWAG) power station Schöneberg (3) This station, built by ESA, is now on the BKL (BEWAG) system and is situated in the Schöneberg district, to the South of the city and 2 miles East of the Wilmersdorf station. It is a reserve plant and has an installed capacity of 20 MW.
BKL (BEWAG) power station Oberschönenweide (3) This station had a capacity of 36 MW. It was closed down in 1933 and converted to a 30/6 kV transformer station.
- 38 -
BERLIN ( contd. ) Public Utility Services II GAS SUPPLY
General
Up to 1939 gas supply in Berlin was undertaken by two companies, the Berliner Städtische Gaswerke A.G. , with works at
Charlottenburg Danziger Str.
Lichtenberg .Neukölln * Tegel
leased to the company by the Municipality, and the Gasbetriebs­ gesellschaft A.G, , a subsidiary of the Deutsche Gasgesellschaft A.G. , with works at
Gitschinerstr. ?
Schöneberg Mariendorf
In 1936 the Berliner Städtische Gaswerke sold 390,600,000 cu.m. of gas and the Gasbetriebsgesellschaft 133 million cu.nu In 1939 the Berliner Städtische Gaswerke (Gasag) took over from the Deutsche Gasgesellschaft the operation bf its three Berlin works, and thus unified gas supply in the city. In Greater Berlin there still remained, however, two independent municipal gas-distributing concerns, those at Niederbarnim and Teltow, Of these the former obtains gas from the GASAG, and the latter from the Potsdam works of the Deutsche Continental- Gas-Gesellschaft.
Municipal Gasworks Charlottenburg t (2) The gasworks is leased by the Municipality to the Berliner Städtische Gaswerke A.G. and is situated just East of Jungfernheide Station. It is bounded in the North by the railway, East by the Verbindungskanal, and South by Gausstrasse. The area of the site is 13^ acres. Maximum daily capacity is estimated at 300,000 cubic metres of gas per day, while normal annual output is about 60 million cubic metres. Electricity supply is taken from the town supply at 3,000 volts A.C. , which is converted to 220 volts (D.C. ) for the old part of the works, to 380 volts .(A, C. ) for power, and to 220 volts (A.C. ) for lighting. Water is drawn from the adjacent Canal.
Municipal Gasworks Danziger Str. (2) The gasworks is leased by the Municipality to the Berliner Städtische Gaswerke A.G. and is situated immediately to the West of Weissensee Station; it is bounded in the North by the railway, South-west by Danziger Strasse, and South-east by Greifswalder Strasse. The area of the works is 24- hectares. /Maximum
- 39 -
BERLIN ( contd.)
Municipal Gasworks (contd.)
Maximum daily capacity is estimated, at 370,000 cubic metres of coal gas and. 100,000 cubic metres of water gas* Electricity it taken from the town supply at 6,000 volts and. transformed, at the works to 220 volts. Water is obtained. * from 2 wells by pumps.
Municipal Gasworks Lichtenberg (2)
The gasworks is leased, by the Municipality to the Berliner Städtische Gaswerke A. G. . and is located East of the river Spree and Just South of Rummelsburg goods station.
It also adjoins the Klingeriberg power station.
The plant has been completely rebuilt since 1934. Maximum daily capacity is estimated at 300,000 cubic metres per day; annual output is probably between 90 and 100 million cubic metres. There is a by-product plant for sulphate of ammonia.
Municipal Gasworks * Neulcolln (2)
The ^.sworks is J. eased by the Municipality to the Berlin Städtische Gaswerke A.G. and is located in the angle formed by the Schiffahrtskanal Just North of Kaiser Friedrichstrasse station. It is bounded on the North by the canal, on the East by the railway, and on the South by the Kaiser Friedrich Strasse.
There are 2 holder stations, one at Banner- strasse (4 holders) Just South-west of the gasworks, the other at Fichtestrasse ('4 holders) which is immediately East of Kaiser Friedrich Platz.
The gasworks covers an area of approx» 75,000- square metres. Maximum daily capacity is 400,000 cubic metres of gas per day; normal annual output being about 100 million cubic metres.
There is also a water-gas plant’and a sulphate of ammonia plant.
Municipal Gasworks Tegel (1)
Leased by the Berlin, Municipality to the Berliner Städtische Gaswerke A.G» The gasworks is situated on the East side of the Tegeler See and stretches eastwards from the lake along the North side of Berbauer Strasse to the railway, South of Tegel station. Maximum daily capacity is estimated at 616,000 cubic metres of coal gas and 240,000 cubic metres of water gas.
There are by-product plants for sulphuric acid (’’chamber” process) and 'sulphate of ammonia. Electricity supply is taken from the town system at 6,000 volts and is converted to 470 volts for power and 220 volts for lighting. Water is obtained from artesian wells.
- 40 -
Municipal Gasworks Gitschinerstr. (3) Formerly owned by the Deutsche Gasgesell­ schaft, this gasworks is situated at Gitschinerstrasse 19/31, Berlin, S.W.68.'
Maximum daily capacity is estimated 50,000 cubic metres of coal gas per day. The gasworks also has a water gas plant.
Municipal Gasworks Schöneberg (3) Formerly owned by the Deutsche Gasgesell­ schaft, thengasworks are situated South­ west of Schoneberg railway Station at the intersection of the Potsdam line with Berlin circular railway (Ringbahn). Maximum daily capacity is estimated at 100,000 cubic metres of coal gas and 50,000 cubic metres of water gas. There are four gas­ holders.
Municipal Gasworks Mariendorf (1) Formerly owned by the Deusche Gasgesell­ schaft the gasworks is situated just South of the Teltow Canal, on the East side of tjxe railway, and is bounded on the South by Lankwitzer Strasse.
Maximum daily capacity is estimated at about 650,000 cubic metres of coal gas and 250,000 cubic metres of water gas. There are two principal gasholders. The works has its own water supply system.
III.Water Supply.
Water Works Lichtenburg (3) Berlin* s principal waterworks.
Stadt Wasser Werke Tegel (3) The Tegal Water works is one of the largest in the Berlin area.
Liquid Fuels and Substitutes
Deutsch Amerikanische Petroluem Ges. Tempelhof *3) Saalburgerstr.
Oil storage depot with a capacity 33,900 tons in 18 tanks. Processing also takes place here but only on a small scale. Heavy fuel oils, lubricating oil and motor spirit are usually the main types in storage.
/Deutsch
- 41 -
BERLIN (contd.)
Deutsch Amerikanische Petroleum Ges. Plotzensee, SAatwinkler Damn (3 )
Oil—storage depot with 4 large tanks. It acts as a filling station and includes a small M.T. repair works.
Rhenania Ossag Mineral Oelwerke A.G. Spandau (3) Rhenaniastr.
Oil-storage depot with a capacity of 20,000 tons. "Alminag” Allgemeine Mineralöl u. Spandau Asphalt K.G. Rauchstr. “Betalag” Berliner Tanklager K.G.
Oil-storage depot consisting of about 30 tanks of various sizes.
Rhenania Ossag Minerolwerke A.G. „ Rummelsburg (3) Oil-storage depot with a capacity of 21,000 tons.
Nonferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication Admos, Allgemeines Deutsches Metallweric Berlin- (2} G.m.b.H. Obersohoneiweide Wilhelmshofstr.
This factory produces bronze and lead-alloy castings aid pressings, and special manganese-bronze. The works include an important research and development plant engaged on evolving special alloys for munition factories. At the given address are also domiciled the Admos Bleibronze Dr. Springorum K.G. and the Admos Rubel-Bronze Vertrieb Dr. Springorum & Co. K.G.
Deutsche Messingwerke Carl Eveking Berlinfieder- . (2) schoneweide, Berlinerstr.
This works produces brass, copper and light-met al alloys; semifinished and finished products, chiefly castings and pressed parts for aircraft, aero-engines, and other purposes. Its alloy capacity is believed to be between 7,500 and 10,000 tons per annum. a J Zinkwalzwerk Reinickendorf G.m.b.H. Berlin-Reinicken- (3) b ) Hirsch Kupfer- u. Messingwerk A.G. dorff est. o) Ruhr stahl A.G. Berliner and Kienhorststr.
These three firms are on one site. A & B are engaged on zinc and aluminium rolling; whilst C is an iron and steel storage depot.
Hüttenwerke Kayser A.G. Berlin-Nieder- (3) schoneweide Spreestr.
This copper refinery has a capacity of 20,000 tons of copper per annum. It includes a copper fabricating plant and rolling mill producing rods, bars etc. The main works of the Hüttenwerke Kayser is at Lttnen.
Zinkhüttenwerke/
BERLIN (contd.)
Zinktnittenwerke Ober spree Berlin-Ober schone- (3) . ,
weide.
Both sides of Tabbertstr. and W. side of Nalepastr.
This is a small zinc smelting and refining establishnent.
Durener Metallwerke A.G. Berlin-Wittenau (2) This is a branch factory of the Düren firm and, like the parent plant, it is mainly engaged on the production of light-metal alloys for the aircraft and other industries. It is an important maker of air-screws.
!lApag” Aluminium Prazisionsguss Berlin-Neubabels- (3) berg y Apag specialises in the production of light-alloy castings including bodies for magnetic mines.
Aircraft and Aero-Engines ♦ B.M.W. Flugmotorenwerk Brandenburg G.m.b.H. Berlin-Spandau (1 ) The Spandau works of B.M.W. is reported to employ more than 4,000 workers, It is mainly engaged on the manufacture of aero-engines and con^onents which are supplied to the works at Basdorf.
Argus Motoren G.m.b.H. Berlin-Reinick- (2) endorf Flottenstr.
Medium h.p. air-cooled aero-engines, propellors, aircraft wheels, brakes, hosepipes, and couplings, rudder bars, and a variety of other aircraft components, are the principal products of this factory.
Henschel Flugzeugwerke A.G. Berlin- (2) Johannisthal
The Johannisthal plant of Henschel is engaged on the manufacture and assembly of Hs.129 and Hs.130.
Hugo Heine a) Berlin-Lichten- (2) berg b) Berlin-Friedrichs­ hain. Warschauerstr.
*
Wooden and metal variable-pit ch airscrews are made on a fairly large scale at the factories of Hugo Heine.
Fo eke-Wulf Flugzeugbau G.m.b.H. Berlin-Johannisthal(2) Segelfliegerdamn
This plant has been engaged on the manufacture of wings and other components for F.W.200»s.
Elektron/
- 43 -
BERLIN (oontd.)
Elektron Co* G.m.b.H. Berlin*6pandau (2) Potsdamerstr.
Light-metal (magnesium) castings, aero-engine pistons, fuselage parts, landing wheels, trailing wheels, under­ carriage parte, and hydraulic apparatus are believed to be produced by the Elektron Conopany on a large scale.
Norddeutsche Dornier-^Verke G.m.b.H. Berlin-Reinioken (3) dorf. Waldstr.
Ground reports suggest that some 500 workers are employed at this factory on the manufacture of small cocponents for the Wismar works of this company.
Heinkel-Werke G.m.b.H. -Berlin-Reinicken- (3) dorf-Ost
Machining of parts for the Heirikel factory at Oranienburg is believed to be the sole activity of this relatively small works.
Luftfahrtgerätewerk Hakenfelde G.m.b.H. Berlin-Spandah (3) Streitstrasse
A small variety of aircraft dashboard instruments are produced by this firm.
Rotadisk G.m«b.H. Berlin-Reinicken- (3)
dorf Ost
Aircraft wheels and brakes are reported to be the principal commodities turned out by Rotadisk.
Weser Flugzeugbau Berlin-Tenpelhof (3) The modification centre of this firm at Berlin- Tenrpelhof may have been extended and have taken up the* assembly of Ju. 87 aircraft.
Flugzeugreparaturwerk Rudcw G.m.b.H. Berlin-Adlershof (3) This is an aircraft and aero-engine repair depot working on a variety of types.
Jordan Bremsen A.G. Berlin-^Jeukblln (3) Lannstr.
Airbrakes and compressors are believed to be the main if not sole products of this company.
Gesellschaft für Luftfahrtbedarf (G.F.L.) Teltow (2) These are the headquarters of the centralised German control organisation for the supply of spare parts and materials for the aircraft industry.
Heinkel/
- A4 -
BERLIN (pontd.)
Heirikel-Werke G-m.b.H. Oranienburg- (1) Annahof
Construction and assembly of multi-engined bombers particularly He.177 and wings for the Ju,. 88 are undertaken at this works which is. reported to employ 8-10,000 workers.
Henschel-Flugzeugwerke A.G. Schonefeld-tfbek, (1 ) Berlin-Grunau (N. end of Aerodrome)
Design and construction of Ju. 88 aircraft is undertaken at this factory which is reported to employ 7,500 workers, Robert Bosah G.m,b.H. . Kleinmachnow (2) This is a factory of the well-known Stuttgart firm«.
Magnetos, ignition equipment, spark plugs, coils, distributors for aircraft, are among its principal products. It has been reported that fuel-injection pumps are also produced here.
Bäcker Flugzeugbau G.m.b.H. Rangsdorf (3) This factory is reported to be making Bäcker types of single-engine trainers as well as gliders.
It is believed to employ some 2,000 workers.
Hirth Motorenbau Waltersdorf G.m.b.H. Waltersdorf (3) Berlin-Teltow
Hirth Motoren are engaged on the production of aero­ engines and the assembly of aero-engine superchargers.
Estimated personnel 2,000.
Junkers Flugzeug & Motorenwerke A.G. Schönebeck (2) Air-frame components and water-cooled aero-engines are the products of the Schönebeck branch of the * Junkers company. Estimated personnel 000.
Arado Flugzeugwerke G,m.b.H. Babelsberg- (2) Potsdam
This works makes air-frame components for the Brandenburg factory and is believed to employ some 3,000 workers.
A.E.G.
Wildau (3)
Ground reports suggest that this factory is engaged on the production of air-frame components.
Approximately 1 ,000 workers are believed to be employed.
Mechanische /
- 45 -
BERLIN (contd.)
Mechanische Werkstätten Neubrandenburg G.m.b.H. Berlin-Britz (3) Süderoderstr.
Aircraft armament fittings, e.g. machine-^un mountings» bomb and aerial-torpedo release gear, small aerial bombs, etc. are believed to be the principal products of this plant which has been reported to enploy some 700 workers.
Prqpellerwerk Gustav Schwarz K.G. Berlin-Waid- (3) mannslust, Oraniendamm
This firm is solely engaged on the production of metal and wooden blades for variable pitch propellers, but its output is believed to be small.
Zahnradfabrik Friedrichshafen A.G. Wittenau (3) This is a relatively small factory of the well known Friedrichshafen firm.
Henschel-Flugzeugwerke A.G. Schonefeld (3) (Uber Berlii>- G-runau) S. end of Aerodrome.
Aircraft repair depot.
Flugzeug Reparaturwerke, Alfred Friedrich Strausberg near (3) Berlin
Aircraft and aero-engine repair depot.
Engineering and. Armaments
Rheinmetall Borsig A.G. Berlin-tfegel (1 ) This very important works normally employs some 25,000 workers and, in one of its main departments, specialises in the production of general engineering plant. The major part of the works is believed now to be engaged on the mass production of field guns, A.A. and A.T. guns, machine guns, ammunition for field and A.A. guns, torpedoes, mine bodies, aerial bombs, tank and A.F.V. components, forgings, drawing presses for shell production, etc.
Ambi-Budd Presswerke G.m.b.H. Berlin-Johannistal (1 ) This factory employs several thousand workers and is the leading German producer of pressings of all types for motor transport, A.F.V1 s, tanks, etc. The site of this factory includes Ford’s Berlin factory.
A.E.G./
- 46 -
BERLIN ( contd. )
A.E.G. Cable Works (Allgemeine Elektrizität s Berlin-Ober schone- (1) Gesellschaft) (Kabelwerk-Ober spree) weide (Oberspree) A very wide range of electric cables including gas- and oil-filled cables together with associated goods? wireless apparatus, telephone and telegraph apparatus; insulators, transformers, high-tension switch gear and protective devices; steam turbines (including the largest types), condensers, reduction gears, turbo-pumps, and boiler feed­ pumps, blowers, etc®, are made at this importeprt works on a large scale« The plant includes mechanical and physical testing laboratories and is the largest German cable manufacturing works and the only German firm making gas- filled cables.
A.E.G. transformer Works (Metallwerke Ober spree) (-) The Metalwerke Oberspree making transformers and high- tension switch gears, etc., is included in the factory site of the above works.
A.E.G. Maschinenfabrik Berlin-Wedding (i) Brunnenstr.
This plant is known as the Brunnenstrasse Werke of A.E.G.
It specialises in the manufacture of electric submarine engines and motors, generators, resistances, fuses, fans, dust extractors, light-railway equipment, cranes, and pumps.
Siemens Planiawerke A tG. für Kohlefabrikate Berlin-Lichtenberg (1 ) Lichtenbergerstr.
This is the leading German producer of carbon electrodes.
Siemens-6ohuckert Werke A.G. Berlin-Garten- (1) feld
Commonly known as the Kabelwerk Gartenfeld this works is mainly engaged on making cables and insulated and un­ insulated wire of all kinds for the transmission and distribution of electric power; also electrical machines, and apparatus of a fairly wide range.
Siemens & Halske A.G. Berlin-Siemenstadt (1 ) This works is commonly known as Wernerwerk. It is the leading German producer of telephone and telegraph equipment, signalling apparatus, apparatus for transformers and oil switches, electric clocks, photographic equipment, electric measuring apparatus of many kinds, relays and heating elements, television and broadcasting sets, measuring instruments for the chemical industry etc. It is situated on the North bank of the river Spree adjacent to the Western outskirts of Berlin and also adjacent to the inportant cable works of Siemens-<5chuckert A.G. at Gartenfeld.
S iemens-Schuckert/
BERLIN (oontd.)
Siemens Schuckertwerke A.G. Berlin-Siemenstadt (1) This works area includes the following Siemeps-Sohuckert factories:- Schaltwerk, Dynamowerk, Elektromotorenwerk, Metalgiesserei, Kleiribauwerk, Kabelwerk, and Metallwerk« The principal products of this group of factories are power and lighting installations, including power-station generators, rotary converters, transformers, condensers, rectifiers, dynamos, switch gear, electric motors of many kinds (including submarine motors), heating apparatus; radio valves, photo-electric cells; furnaces and electrolytic plant, automatic current regulators for furnaces; electrical equipment for submarines, torpedo discharge gear; electrical equipment for hydrogenation plants, etc. Next to Bosdh at Stuttgart this is also the largest concentration Of prod­ uction of ignition generators and sparking plugs. The factories are situated on the North bank of the Spree adjacent to the Western outskirts of Berlin, and next to the important cable works of Siemens-Sdhuckert A.G. at Gartenfeld.
Aooumulatoren Fabrik A.G. Berlin-Oberschöne- (1 ) weide®
This is the main A.F.A. works in Berlin and it has a considerable output of accumulators, accumulator components and dry batteries.
0)
2)
3)
Deutsche Waff en- und Munitions-Fabriken A.G. 1) Berlin, Wittenau'
Borsigwalde ‘ Eichborndanm Eichborndanm '
Eichborndanm '
A H three Berlin works of the Deutsche Waffen und Munitions Fabriken A.G. are engaged on the manufacture of machinery and installations for the production of .ammunition. In addition they make machine guns, small arms, and S.A.A. as well as precision tools and other engineering products. The three works together are believed to enploy about 5 >000 workers.
Deutsche Industriewerke A.G. Berlin-Spandau (1) Freiheit
Several thousand workers are believed to be employed by this plant on the manufacture of special machinery for the production of motor vehicles and locomotives; tools, jigs, and metal castings, including light­ alloy castings; also gun components, small arms, as well as plunger-type aircraft pumps.
Berliner/
48 -
BERLIN (oontd.)
Berliner Maschinenbau A.G. (vorm.L.Schwartzkopff) Wildau (1 ) The factory is at Wildau near Konigswustqrhausen, about 17 miles South-east of Berlin. All types of main-line steam locomotives are made, also Diesel models. The estimated pre-war capacity was 100-120 locos per annum and there were 2,000-2,500 employees.
This firm has another works at Berlin-Wedding.
Bor sig Lokcmotivwerke G.m.b.H. Hennigsdorf (1 ) These works, situated about 2 miles South of Hennigsdorf, produce all types of main-line steam locomotives and electric locomotives. They are estimated to have had a pre-war capacity of 100-120 locos per annum and .to have employed 1 ,500-2,000 workers on loco, construction.
Berliner Maschinenbau A.G. (vorm.L.Schwartzkopff) Berlin-4Vedding(l ) Scheringstr»
Precision machine tools; torpedo components, gyroscopes, depth-setting gears, propeller components; electric torpedoes; air compressors for submarines; and a variety j of other armaments are madp at the Wedding works of the Berliner Maschinenbau A.G. on a large scale. This plant works in conjunction with the firm1 s main establishment at Wildau.
Daimler-Benz A.G. Berlin- (1) Marienfelde
The Berlin-iferienfelde works of the Daimler-Benz A.G. is primarily engaged on the manufacture of D.B. aero­ engines and tanks, tractors and lorries; also Diesel engines, naval supersonic-wave apparatus,and other armaments. They are reported to employ over 8,000 workers. «
Knorr-Bremse A.G. Berlin (1) Rummelsburg
This firm specialises in the production of conpressed air brakes; it also has a considerable output of equipment for submarines; machine guns; compressors, rail and tramway material, etc. and may still be making narrow-gauge locomotives on a small scale. It is situated to the North-east of the Ostkreuz station and facing on Hirschberger str.
Pallas Apparate G.m.b.H. Berlin-Wedding(l ) Ackerstr.
This is one of Germany’s leading makers of carburettors, especially for aero-engines, and it is also an important producer of fuel'-dnjection punps and other engine components.
Mix/
49 -
BERLIN (oontd.)
Mix and Genest A.GZ Schoneberg (2) Geneststr.
This important firm makes a wide range of telephone, telegraph, and electrical signalling equipment, wireless sets, dictaphones; also pneumatic tools. It is believed to eiqploy about 3,000 workers.
Ges.fttr Elektrische Unternehmungen A.G. Hüttenstr. (1} (formerly L. Loewe)
Electric fire-control instruments, electric firing mechanisms, range finders and a wide range of other electrical instruments aTe the principal products of this main works of the ’Gesfttrel" , company. It is reported that about 5,000 workers are now en^loyed by this firm in its three Berlin works.
A.E.G. Apparatefabrik Treptow Berliner ept ow(l ) Hoffmanstr.
Low-tension switch-gear and protective devices; wireless apparatus, aircraft radio equipment, con$>asses, supersonic devices, aviation magnetos, and direction finders etc., are made by this f£rm on a large scale, also film and sound film apparatus. More than 5,000 workers are reported to be employed here.
A.E.G. Turbinenfabrik Berlin- (1) Charlottenburg
This is the leading German steam-turbine works. It is also an important maker of condensers, pumps, etc., and has been reported to build Diesel engines. It is believed to employ several thousand workers. The area covered by these works extends North and South of Sickingenstr.
Telefunken'Ges. für Drahtlose Telegraphie m.b.H. Berlin- (1 ) Schöneberg Max Str.
This is one of the leading German’manufacturers of wireless transmitting and receiving sets for all services purposes.
C. Lorenz A.G. Berlin- (1) Tempelhof*
This is one of the leading German producers of wireless sets for military purposes, blind-flying apparatus and other aircraft instruments; it also makes telephones, tele­ printers, and railway signals and before the war made household wireless sets. It is situated on the North and South banks of the Teltow canal, East of Tempelhof Hafen«
Bergmann/
- 50 -
BERLIN (contd.)
Bergmann Elektrizitäts A.G. Berlin- 0 ) Reinickendorf
Steam turbines, electric vehicles of various kinds, electrical plant and motors; high- and low-tension cables, insulating materials, sectional steel tubes, etc® Osram G.m.b.H. Berlin- (1) Lichtenberg
This is the leading German maker of radio valves, electric light bulbs and associated products« It works in conjunction with two Berlin branches at Charlottenburg and Siemensstadt. A large proportion of its products are sold through and under the name of Telefunken. The works is at Ehr eribergstr <> facing on Stralauer Allee on the North bank of the river Spree and immediately North-east of the Oberbaum Bridge.
Julius Pintsch K.G. Berlin 0.17 (2) (Southern works). Breslauerstr.
This works is believed to eriploy about 1,200 workers on the production of search-lights, signalling apparatus, etc.
Julius Pintsch K.G. Berlin 0.17 (2) (Northern works) Andreastr.
Military signalling instruments; electro-technical appliances etc., also industrial plant for oil­ refineries are made at this plant which is believed to enploy about 1,000 workers.
Büssing-Nag, Vereinigte Nutz-Kraftwagen A.G. Berlin- (2) Wiessensee
This factory is normally engaged on lorries, heavy and light tractors, omnibuses, etc., and it is believed that this production programme has been retained during the war. Recent extensions are believed to be engaged on repair and maintenance of military transport. One department is reported now to specialise in the production of direction finders.
Maschinenfabrik Prometheus G.nub'.H. Berlin-Reinick- (2) endorf Ost.
Hauptstr.
Gears, gear boxes and rear axles for road vehicles, gears and reduction gearing for tanks and aircraftAre made by this firm, -which is only of secondary importance in the road-vehiole industry, but is believed to supply a fair proportion of the gears required by the Junkers group of aircraft factories.
Fritz Werner A.G./
- 51 -
BERLIN (oontd.)
Fritz Werner A.G. Berlin-iÄariendorf (2) Fritz Werner A.G. is of importance as a maker of milling and grinding machinery and boring and rifling machines for S.A. manufacture.
Raboma Maschinen-Fabrik Hermann Sohoening Berlin-Borsigwalde (2) Holzhäuser st r • This factory is believed to be the largest German producer of radial drilling machines; it also'makes several types of machine tools on a small scale.
Elektro-Thermit G.m.b.H. Berlin-Tempelhof (2) .
South bank of Teltow canal This is one of the leading German producers of welding apparatus.
Deutsche Nileswerke A.G. Berlin-Weissensee (2) This is an important machine-tool works specialising in oonpressed-air tools, lathes, and grinders, and believed to employ some 2,500 workers.
A.E.G. Transformer Works Berlin-Ober schöne- (2) Weide Transformers and insulating material are the principal products of this large works.
V.K:F.
Erkner (1) The Erkner factory is situated about 18 miles S.E. of the Berlin centre. The works is estimated to possess floor space of about 350,000 square feet arranged in a modern layout on a site of 25* acres which is well marked by woods and lakes. One the basis of its size it is estimated to employ 2,000-3,000 hands. It is believed to concentrate on heavy aircraft bearings«
V.K.F.
Neukölln (?) (-) Neutral sources insist that aV.K.F. plant is located in KOEPENIQCERSTR., NEÖK0ILN, but there is no such street in that district, nor is there a ball-bearing plant in any of the five other streets of that name in Berlin. There is, however, a small factory, formerly known as RIEBE, which was acquired by the V.K.F. combine at its formation, and which is the most likely identifi­ cation for the reported plant.
Norddeutsche Kugellagerfabrik Berlin-Lichtenberg (2 ) This small factory, situated adjoining the Lichtenberg railway sidings, is engaged in the production of standard bearings of indifferent quality in the medium range of sizes. It was acquired by the Fischer combine before the war and is believed to enqploy about 500 hands.
Askania/
52 -
BERLIN (contd. )
Askania Werke A.GF. A) Berlin-Mariendorf (2) GFrossbeerenstr.
Steglitz (2) C) Friedenau
This firm makes a wide range of optical and precision instruments, including direction finders-, fire-control apparatus, remote-control gear, conpasses, altimetres, speedometers, cameras, etc., and is believed to enploy 7,000 workers in its three Berlin factories. According to reports the assembling and testing of the instruments is carried out at the FRIEDENAU factory.
Dr. Cassirer & Co. A.G. Berlin-Spandau (2) (Havelwerk) ' Raudhstr.
The. works manufactures lead-covered power cables for high and low, tension. They were opened in 1930 and all the lead-presses and armouring machines for lead-covered cables were transferred here from the original works in Charlottenburg. The works now belong to the SIEMENS interest represented by ELEKTRISCHE LIGHT- UND KRAFTANLAGEN A.G.
Siemens-Sohuckert Werke A.G. Berlin-Spandau (2) This factory is chiefly engaged on assembly of telegraph, signalling and similar apparatus as well as military W/T sets.
4»
Ges. für Elektrische Unternehmungen A.G. Berlin-Charlottenburg (2) Wiebestr. and Klareribachstr•
Machine tools and small tools such as milling cutters and high-speed tools, castings* etc. are made at the Charlotteribux'g branches of this firm on a fairly large scale.
Osram Lanp Works Berlin-Charlotteriburg (2) This factory makes radio valves and associated products. Its main works is at Berlin-Lichtenberg.
Osram Glassworks Berlin-Siemensstadt ( 2 ) Radio valves and glass components for electric light bulbs, etc. are made at this factory on a large scale. Its main works is at Berlin-Licht erib erg 0 Blaupunktwerke G.m.b.H. Werk I. Berlin-Wilmersdorf (2) This is a subsidiary of BOSCH and is mainly engaged on the production of wireless apparatus, transmitting and receiving sets.
Blaupuriktwerke/
-5 5 -
BERLIN (oontd.)
Blaupuriktwerke G.m.b.H. Werk II. Berlin S.O. (3) Kopeniakerstr•
This is the assembly and despatch unit for the aforementioned factory. a J Altkett G.m.b.H. (Werk I) Borsidwalde b5 Fahrzeug- und Gerätebau G.m,b.H. c) Otis Auf zugwerke G.m.b.H. d) Hauptwerkstatt für Postkraftwagen.
This is a group of 4 factories situated on one large site bordered by Breiteribaohstr • and Innungstr. Their individual activities are as follows
a) A.F.V. assembly (2) b) motor .transport ) o) lifts and hoists J d) M.T. repairs* Overhaul of post j office lorries used in Berlin ) area*
)
'i
Deutsche Benzinuhren G.m.b.H. Berlin-Tempelhof (J) Bergmannstr.
Electric fuel feed-pumps and other electrical apparatus are made by this firm on a fairly large scale.
Gebr. Leutert Berlin-Ober schöne- (J) weide Rummelsburger Chausee
Leutert is of some importance as a manufacturer of transformers and* insulating material.
’’Nordbau” Norddeutsche Motorenbau G.m»b.H. Berlin- (3) Niedersch&ne- weide Berlinerstr.
Small Diesel motors are made by this firm which is reported to employ about 800-4 ,000 workers.
Dr. Cassirer/
- 54
BERLIN (oontd.)
Dr« Cassirer & Co. A.G. Berlin-Charlotteriburg (3) (parent works)
. This factory is situated facing on Keplerstr. and bordered on the South by Gustav Adolfstr.
This is the original, but now less important, factory and manufactures only rubber- insulated cables and wires. The lead presses and armouring machines for paper-insulated cable have been transferred to the Spandau works. The works are owned by the Siemens interests.
Siemens & Kalske A.G. Wernerwerke Berlin-Has eIhor st (3) This plant is believed to be solely used for stores of general electro-engineering equipment.
Klockner-Kumblodt-Deutz A.G. (Werk Magirus) Ten^elhof (3) Bessemerstr.
This is a motor-transport repair works employed chiefly on military vehicles and reported to employ some 1 ,200 workers.
Ariadne Draht- und Kabelwerke A.Gt Berlin-Lichteriberg (3) Boxhagenstr.
Insulated wire and cables are the principal products of this company.
Carl Flohr G.m.b.H. Borsigwalde. (3) Between Strasse 22 Innung Flohr and Herzog Stm.
Lifting gear and hoists are made by this factory on a large scale.
Stahlbau Witteribau G.m.b.H. and (3) Wittenauer Maschinenfabrik G.m.b.H. Borsigwalde, Innungstr.
Constructional steel, bridge material, cranes, lifts, machine components, etc. are made by these two firms, which are working as one unit.
(a)/
55
BERLIN (contd.)
a J Getriebebau G.m.b.H. (3) bj F» Stolzenberg & Co* o) Maschinenfabrik Otto Aeron Reinickendorf West.
Waldstr.
These three engineering firms are believed to be closely associated with each other and to produce a fair range of machine tools.
Gustav Genschow & CO..A.G. Neukölln (3) Abt. Waffenfabrik Boudhestr.
Small arms and S.A.A. are the main products of this film.
Jordan Bremsen A.G. Neukölln (3) Lahnstr.
Air brakes and compressors are believed to be the principal products of this company.
Ehrlich & Graetz Neukölln (3) Eisenstr.
This firm makes electrical apparatus, wireless sets, etc.
a) Reiohs-fl?elegraphm Zeugamt Tempelhof ) b) Troitsch A.G. a) Industriestr. ) (3) b) Colditzstr. J
These firms specialise in:- aj Telephone and telegraph equipment, b) Cables and wire rope.
Siemens^Apparate G-.m.b.H. Berlin-Marienfelde, (3) Siemensstr.
This factory is believed to be engaged on aircraft instruments and other precision apparatus.
Siemens-Apparate G.m.b.H. Berlin-Lichtenberg (3) Krimhildstr.
This factory is believed to be engaged on aircraft instruments and other precision apparatus.
(a)/
BERLIN (c o n td .)
- 56
a) R. Stock & Co. M ariendorf b) H artex G.m,b. H. G ro ssb eeren str. a ) (2) These firm s occupy thd same fa c to ry s ite and irake:- a ) Machine to o ls , e s p e c ia lly g rin d in g ,b o rin g , and m illin g m achinery. b) D r i l l s and h y d ra u lic p re sse s. fo) (3) Z eiss-Ikon A. G. form erly ’ F ried en au , a) (3) a ) Goerzwerke. R e in str.
These woiks occupy one fa c to ry s i t e and t h e i r a c t i v i t i e s a r e : - a) M anufacture o f o p tic a l in stru m en ts, p a r tic u la r ly range f in d e rs , b in o c u la rs , and f ir e - c o n tr o l a p p a ra tu s. b) F riedenauer Technische W e rk sta tte :- b) (3) b ) a re th e re se a rc h and development la b o r a to r ie s o f the Goerzwerke.
Auto-Union A.G. W ilmersdorf This i s a M. T. r e p a ir and m aintenance depot.
I t i s s itu a te d between C icero Jfen sfeld er and E isen zah n str. and H bhenzollern Damm. a j M. Heckmann b) Auto-Union A.G. c) B aresynski & Co.
W ilm ersdorf N e s to rs tr.
These th re e firm s occupy one s i t e .
They a r e : - a j M.T. r e p a ir and m aintenance depot, b) M.T. re p a ir and m aintenance depot, c) General engineering workshops.
Auto-Union A.G. Spandau T his i s a r e p a ir and m aintenance o f m ilita r y tra n s p o rt.
F ritz Werner A.G. S trausberg Nr. B e rlin
This p la n t s p e c ia lis e s in m illin g ,g r in ding, bo rin g and r i f l i n g machines and o th e r machine to o ls f o r S.A. f a c to r ie s , Gema (G e se llsc h a ft f u r E le k tro a k u stisc h e B e rlin - Mechanische A pparate) Kopenick
(3 )
(3 )
(3)
(3)
(3 )
F ie ld communication ap p aratu s such as w ire le ss tra n s m itte rs , telep h o n es, e tc . a re th e p rin c ip a l p ro d u cts o f th is firm .
CHEMICALS AND EXPLOSIVES/
BERLIN (contd.) - 57 - C H M G A I S AND EXPLOSIVES
Gevaert-V oigtlander Berlin- (3) Spindlersfeld
Photographic materials including cameras and paper are made at this works on a large scale.
Kodak A.G. Kopenick (5)
Cine- and ordinary films are produced at the Köpenick works of the Kodak A.G. whose largest producing unit is at Stuttgart.
Zeiss-Ikon Film-Werke Zehlendorf (2) This factory was formerly known as the Goerz Werke.
It is believed that of the total German production of reconnaissance film is accounted for at this works (the remaining 9<^ is concentrated at the Agfa plant at Bitterfeld-Wolfen). A branch of this firm is at Berlin-Friedenau (see under Engineering and Armaments).
J.D. Reidel-JE. De Haen A.G. Berlin-Britz Riedelstr. (2)
This factory normally employs about 2,000 workers on the production of pharmaceutical and medicinal preparations.
Schering A.G. a)Berlin- ) (1) Charlottenburg ) b) Wedding ) o) Adlershaf )
This is one of the leading German manufacturers of pharmaceuticals, medicinal preparations, serums, synthetic camphor, etc. It has three factories in Berlin as follcws:-
Berlin^Vedding; This factory houses the main offices of the company and the research laboratories. It also carries out all the tabletting and packaging of the pharmaceutical products, and has besides a small manufacturing capacity. The plant produces iodine and bismuth preparations«, and a proprietary product “Atcphan" (cinchophen, for the treatment of gout). Staff employed were 1,000 clerical, 200 research chemists, and 500 other workersjbefore the war.
fferlin-Charlotteriburg: All buildings of this factory are leased to other firms with the exception of one floor where the bacteriological research is carried on. It also finished the preparation of insulin supplied by the Berlins-Adlershof plant. All products were sent to Berlin-Wedding for packing and distribution.
This plant employed 50 research workers.
Berlin-Adler shof: /
- 58 -
BERLIN (Contd.)
Berlin-Adlershof; The bulle of the pharmaceutical products is carried out at this factory. A large variety of products are manufactured, including hormones, pharmaceutical ether, synthetic narcotics (e.g. veramon), Urotropine (Hexamethylene tetramins) and a variety of mixed preparations, conmercial solvents, reagents for laboratory works, and numerous fine chemicals are also made. Semi-finished insulin is prepared here and then sent to Charlottenburg for finishing. The production of laboratory reagents is second only to that of E. Merck, Darmstadt. The factory is believed to employ 1 ,500 workers.
Schering is also a large manufacturer of sodium hypophosuphite and phosphoric acid, it is also the largest manufacturer of glycerophosphates in Europe, being responsible for 25/30 tons out of an estimated world consumption of-50/60 tons p.a. Where this manufacture is carried out is not known, but it is probably at the Adlershof factory. ’’Agfa” Universum Film A.G. Tempelhof (-) Situated in Oberlahnstr. the site canprises, the head office, studios, and workshops of the Ufa film canpany.
Kindermann & Co.
This is a small factory making films, photographic material, eto.
I.G. Farbenindustrie Runmelsberg (-) Situated in Haupt str. the site includes the I.G. distribution centre and the distribution centre for Aceta rayon products.
Chemische Fabrik G-runau (3) G-runau A.G-.
Situated in Regatterstr. this firm makes pharmaceutical and medicinal preparations on a fairly large scale.
Auergesellschaft A.G. Oranienburg (1) This is one of the most inportant G-erman makers of anti-gas equipment, particularly gas masks, escape apparatus, incandescent gas-mantles, luminous paints, and a large variety of other chemical products.
59
\
B E R N B U R G (Anhalt) 51° 45’ N. 11° 45* E: 510 miles: (40,000) Bemburg is situated approximately 25 miles South of Magdeburg on the railway from Dessau to Aschersleben. The town’s growth is due to the surrounding s a lt deposits which are exploited by the chemical works of the Deutsche Solway-Werke A.G. Bernburg, however, is now chiefly important owing to the large Junkers Assembly Works.
Transportation Railway Repair Shops Bernburg (3) These medium sized railway workshops are engaged on the repair and maintenance of goods trucks and passenger coaches.
A ircraft and Aero Engines Junkers
Bemburg (1)
Situated a t the Northern end of the Bernburg aerodrome, some 2 miles North West of the town, is the main assembly plants of the Junkers Flugzeug und Motorenwerke G.m.b.H. , whose parent works are in Dessau. The components for th is plant are supplied by the works a t Aschersleben, H alberstadt, Schönebeck and Rüsselsheim. In 1942 an average of some 5$ Ju.88*s and 20 Ju.$2*s were being produced each month. L atterly , however, the plant has begun the assembly of Ju .188. This is a development of the Ju. 88 and is used for night bombing, intruding and torpedo bonding. In 1942 some 2,500 workers were reported to be employed a t the Bemburg plant.
Chemicals and Explosives KAliweike Solw yhall Kot tensches tr. (1) The Deutsche Solway Werke A. G-., whose parent works are in Bemburg, were formed to exploit the ric h s a lt deposits in th is d is tr ic t.
The firm has another large factory a t Osternienburg in Anhalt. The Bemburg plant manufactures soda bicarbonate, soda ash (ammon­ ia soda) and magnesium soda and potash.
The soda ash capacity of the plant is 240,000' tons per annum, or 41% of the to ta l German production of soda ash; crude potash capacity 420,000 tons per annum; and potash s a lts are produced a t a rate of 200,000 tons per annum. In 1936 a to ta l o f -6,000 workers were employed in the two factories a t Bemburg and Osternienburg.
- 60 -
B E T Z D O R F S I E G T H A L (Rhineland) 50° 45» N. 7° 40* E: 300 miles: (12,400) Betzdorf Siegthal lie s on the main rail-way from Cologne to Siegen, and is a junction for Wetzlar and Giessen* The town's a c tiv itie s include an engineering works, a few small metal working plants, and food factories. The firm mentioned below, however, is the only plant worthy of note.
Engineering and Armaments Quast
Betzdorf (2)
The Quast Maschinenfabrik G.nub.H., whose parent works are in Cologne, are reported, to have opened a branch factory a t Betzdorf in October 1941. This plant is believed to be making mortars, and has been reported as employing as many as 5,000 workers.
Iron and Steel and Ferro-Alloys FriedrichshÜtte Herdorf (3) (approximately 3 kilometres south west of Betzdorf) This iron and ste e l works belonging to the Vereingite Stahlwerke A.G., i s believed to have a capacity of some 100,000 tons per anniw I t is reported to produce bomb and sh e ll castings*
-™ -o 0 o ~ •—
B E U E L (Rhineland) 50° 40* N. 7° 10» E: 320 miles: (21,000) Beuel is on the rig h t bank of the Rhine opposite Bonn* I t is on a main railway along the Rhine to South West Germany, and contains a few minor industries, including chemical and dye works. None of these are of importance apart from the firm mentioned below.
Chemicals and Explosives.
L. C. Märquart A.G. Siegburgerstr. (3) The chemical factory of Dr.Marquart A. G, normally employs some 300 workers and has a cobalt refinery with a capacity of 400 tons per annum. Among i ts principal products are cobalt s a lts and pigments.
- 61 -
B E U T H E N (Silesia)
50° 20’ N. 18° 55’ E. 835 miles (105,000) Beuthen is the most easterly of the three adjacent mining towns in the extreme South east com er of Upper S ilesia, the others being Gleiwitz and Hindenburg. The former Polish fro n tie r runs closely round the northern, eastern and southern borders of the town. The built-u p area of the town i ts e lf contains few industries of note but the highly important VOHAG ste e l worts and six of the large Upper Silesian coal mines are grouped to the West and North West of Beuthen. Beuthen is the centre of the lead and zinc mining d is tr ic t of Upper S ilesia.
Transportation
Goods Yards Beuthen (2) The railway goods yards are on the South Western outskirts of the town near to the village of Schomberg. These goods yards have a very large storage capacity and include a small marshalling yard.
Public U tility Services
Power Station Schomberg (2) The thermal power statio n belonging to the G räflich Schaffgotsche Werke is near the village of Schomberg. I t is believed to have a capacity of over 50 MW.
Gas Works Beuthen (3) The Verbands Gaswerk, Beuthen-Hinderiburg G.m.b.H. has an output in 1936 of about 425 m illion cubic fee t of gas.
Solid Fuels
Heinitzgrube Beuthen (3).
The Heinitz and Hoffnung group of mines belong to the Bergweikgesellschaf t Georg von Giesches Erben and are on the South Eastern outskirts of Beuthen. There are five pitheads. In 1937 2,600 workers were employed and 1,400,000 tons of coal were produced.
X
Preussengrube Bobrek-Karf (3) The coal mines of the Preussengrube A.G. are situated to the North West of the village of Bobrek, 2 miles West of Beuthen.
There are three pitheads. In 1937 2,900 workers were employed and the output was 1,400,000 tons of coal.
- 62 -
Beuthengrube (cos. Radzionkay grübe) Beu then (3; This coal mine belongs to the Henckel von Donnersmarck Estates and is situated in the Beuthener Stadtwald 3 miles North West of the town. There is 1 pithead. 2,200 workers were employed before the war and the 19 3 7 output of coal was 1,100,000 tons.
Karsten Zentrum-Grube Beuthen (3) The Vereinigte Karsten Zentrum-coal mine of the Schlesische Bergwerks & Hutten A.G. is situated on the Western outskirts of Beuthen and ftas 3 pitheads. 4,000 workers were employed before the war and the coal output was 1,600,000 tons in 1937.
Hohenzollemgrube Schomberg (3) (Beu the)
The Hohenzollerngru.be, which together .with the Gräfin Johanna mine, mentioned below, belongs to the Gräflich Schaf fgotsch* sehe Werke G.m. b.H. is immediately to the South of Beuthen goods station close to the village of Schomberg. There are 3 pitheads. In 1937 production was 2,100,000 tons of coal per annum and 3,300 workers were employed.
Gräfin Johanna Grube Bobrek-Karf (3) The Gräfin Johanna mine has 2 pitheads. 4,000 workers were employed before the war and the out­ put was 2,800,000 tons of coal in 1937.
Coking Plant Bobrek (3) The Julienhütte coking plant forms part of the VOHAG steel works referred to below. This coking plant is associated with the Castellengo group of coal mines in Hindenburg. There are 240 coking ovens and a by-products plant.
Iron and Steel and Ferro Alloys VOHAG Julienhütte Bobrek (3) The Julienhütte steel works of the Vereinigte Oberschlesische Hüttenwerk A.G. are in the village of Bobrek, 2 miles West of Beuthen.
They are equipped with Siemens-Martin ovens, forges, rolling mills and a wagon factory. 175,000 tons of pig iron and 425,000 tons of Siemens crude steel is the estimated annual capacity of the plant. Complete light rail­ ways, railway metals and points, plating for wagons and heavy vehicles, and foundry wheels, are among the known products of this plant.
The works include a coking plant which is mentioned above under Solid Fuels. For farther particulars of the VOHAG concern see under GLEIWITZ.
- 63 -
Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication
Bleischarleygrub e
Beuthen-Rossberg (3)
This lead and zinc mine belongs to the Bergwerkgesellschaft Georg von Giesches Erben, and is situated on the South Eastern outskirts of Beuthen close to the former Polish frontier. In 1939 the out­ put was 400,000 tons of ore. 2,000 workers were employed.
Fiedlersglück Beuthen • (3)
The Fiedlersglück zinc mine is worked in conjunction with the neighbouring mines Jenny Otto and Wilhelmsgluck-Ostfeld.
This group of mines belong to the Schlesische Bergwerks & Hutten A.G. They are connected by an aerial railway. In 1939 the output of ore was 210,000 tons.
Some 500 workers were employed.
Neue Viktoria Miechowitz (3)
The Neue Viktoria zinc mine of the Schlesische Bergwerks & Hutten A.G. is situated to the East of the village of Miechowitz, 3 miles North West of Beuthen. In 1939 the output of this mine was 150,000 tons of ore.
Friedrichsgrube Dombrowa (3)
This lead and zinc mine belongs to the Preussische Bergwerks & Hutten A.G. and is immediately to the North of the village of Miechowitz 3 miles North West of Beuthen.
The mine was not being fully operated before the war and had only a small output, according to the latest information. In 1939 a total of 15,000 tons of ore were mined.
Neuhof Dombrowa (3)
The Neuhof zinc mine belongs to the Schlesische Bergwerks & Hutten A. G. and is near to the village of Dcmbrowa 3 miles North North West of Beuthen. This mine is associated with the Wilhelms glück-Westf eld zinc mine 2 miles North of Beuthen. From 1918 and until the latest date for which information is available, these two mines were not being operated.
Engineering and Armaments
Engemann Ostlandstr. (3) The Zahnraderfabrik H. Engemann & Co. are manu­ facturers of all types of cog wheels. They employ some 1,000 workers.
- 64 -
Kühlturmbau Beuthen (3) The firm of Kfihlturmbau Heidi & Co. sp ecialize in the construction of veter refrigerating towers and. in d u strial coaling in sta lla tio n s.
■— oOo—
- 65 -
BIEIJEFELD (Westphalia)
52° N. 8° 30’ E: 375 miles : (125,000) The industrial town of Bielefeld, lies on the main railway line from Berlin through Hanover to Hamm. The town has been considerably developed during recent years and besides being the centre of the linen trade, it contains several engineering works which in peacetime special­ ised largely in the manufacture of cycles and sewing machines. Most of these industries are grouped in the centre of the town in the vicinity * of the main goods station« Other industries include metal working, silk weaving plants, and clothing factories.
Transportation
Goods Station Bielefeld (3) The Goods Station is situated immediately to the East of the main railway station and has large storage accomodation. There are also marshalling yards adjoining.
Railway Repair Shops Beilefeld (3) These are large repair shops employing approximately 1,000 workers, and undertaking chiefly the repair and maintenance of goods wagons in 1939.
Public Utility Services
Unter station Beilefeld (3)
lying 130 miles from Brauweiler, this important Beilefeld distributing substation is on the 220 kV Brauweiler-Spandau line and is associated with the thermal station of the same name.'
Kraftwerke Beilefeld (3) Supplying Beilefeld and district, this thermal power station has a capacity of 41 MY. It lies directly N.E. of the main railway station.
Gaswerke Beilefeld (3) The municipal gasworks sold, in 1936, 700 million cubic feet of gas and carbonized 31,000 tons of coal. It is situated to the N.E. of the main station adjoining the electricity works.
- 66 -
Engineering and Armaments
Anker Werke A.G.
Anker Werke A.G.
*
Ravensbergs tr, (3 ) Am Stadtholz (2) E. of Goods Station
This engineering firm formerly employed some 1,800 workers on the production of motor cycles, bicycles, slot machines, sewing machines and various types of adding and calculating machines. They are now reported to have increased the total number of their workers to 5,000 and to be engaged on the production of army motor cycles, and small arms amnunition.
Benteler Werke A.G. Weidenstr. (3) This firm was formerly engaged on the manufacture of pylons, masts, road and railway telegraph installations and M.T. components. They are now reported to be producing complete armoured vehicles and tracked guns» Gebr. Dickertmann Jollenbeckerstr. (-) The Gebr. Dickertmann Hebezeugfabrik A.G. employ some 300 workers on the production of all types of cranes and industrial lifts.
Droep & Rein Am Guterbahnhof (3) Situated directly N. of the main goods station, this machine factory, whose equipment also includes an iron foundry, employs some 400 workers on the production of machine tools.*
Durkopp Werke A.G. Kic. Durkoppstr. (2) Durkojp Werke A.G. Kaiserstr.- (3) Heimann Str.
This important engineering undertaking has two plants in Bielefeld, both of which are situated in the centre of the town. In peacetime this fiim produces cycles, sewing machines and various types of office machinery. They are now reported to employ some 3,800 workers on the manufacture of motor cycles and small arms components.
Gildemeister A.G. Kleine Bahnhof Str.
(3)
The firm of Gildemeister & Co. A.G. employ some 600 workers, and produces lathes and milling and precision grinding machinery.
- 67 -
BEILEFELD (contd)
Goricke Werke Paulusstr. (3)
The works of August Goricke, whiqh formerly specialised in bicycles and in milk separating machinery, now employs some 800 workers on the manufacture of motor cycles and various other types of military transport.
Kochs Werke Teich Str. (2)
The Kochs Adlemahmaschinen Werke A.G. have their main factory in Beilefeld and "branch works in Hamburg. In peacetime they made all type of sewing machines and employed 1,300 workers. They are probably now engaged on the manufacture of small arms components, and other war material suitable to their type of plant.
Phoenix A.G. KL. Bahnhof Str. (2)
The Phoenix Nahmaschinen A. G. Baer & Rempel have their main factory in Beilefeld, and branch works in Wurzburg and Budapest. In peacetime they employed 1,150 workers and manufactured sewing machines. They are probably now engaged on armament production.
Pr€.zisionswerke Detmolderstr. (3)
These works are 2 miles South East of the main station. The firm normally manufactures bicycle components and employed some 500 workers before the war. It is now reported to be engaged on the production of precision bearings.
Textiles, Rayon,Pulp and Paper
, Ravensberg A. G. . . Schildesche (-) The Mechanische Weberei Ravensberg A, G. are manufacturers of linen products of all kinds.
They employ 200 workers.
Mechanische Weberei Beilefeld (-) The Beilefelder A.G. fur Mechanische Weberei is a Weaving mill making chiefly linen products, which employed some 800 workers before the war.
Seidenweberei Hinderiburgstr. (-) The Ravensberger Seidenweberei G.m.b.H. is a weaving mill making chiefly artificial silk products.
- 68 -
BEILEFELD ( oontcL )
Leather
Lohmann Werke Konigstr. (-) The Lohmann Werke A.G, are makers of leather goods of all kinds, including travelling cases and bicycle saddles.
— “ --0 O 0
BINGEN (Hesse)
49° 55’ N. 7° 55’ E: 367 miles: (22,000) Bingen is on the left bank of the Rhine 15 miles West of Mainz, It is divided from the twin town of Bingerbrück by the River Nahe which here forms the boundary between the two Provinces, Hessen and Rhineland. Bingen is on the main railway which follows the left bank of the Rhine from Cologne to Frankfort/Main. It is a junction for the railway leading up the Nahe valley to the Saar territory. The town contains a small number of industrial firms, most of which are connected with the wine trade, but none of these are of individual importance.
Transportation
Railway Repair Shops Bingerbrück (2) These medium sized railway workshops are engaged on the maintenance and repair of goods wagons.
Marshalling Yards Bingerbrück (2) These marshalling and shunting yards have a capacity of 2,400 wagons per 24 hours.
— — — o0o
-69-
B I E T E R ? E L D (Province Saxony) 51° 45' N. 12° 20* E: 535 m iles: (55,000) The n ain railw ay from B erlin to H alle and F ran k fo rt/M ain , passes through B itte r f e ld where a second lin e d iv erg es and le a d s t o L eipzig.
I t i s a ju n c tio n fo r a branch lin e to D essau. The town’s c h ie f a c tiv ity i s connected w ith th e chem ical and m e ta llu rg ic a l p la n ts , most o f which are now owned by th e I . G. F a rb e n in d u strie concern, and which are grouped to g e th e r in d is tin c t a re a s a s fo llo w s: - a) SOUTH, a tria n g u la r shaped area com prising th e power S tatio n ; I . G.FARBEN und METALLGESELLSCHAJT, ALUMENIpil WERK I; WgRK MAIMJHAL; GRIESHEIM ELECTRON WERK I (SUD), and the SAURE FABRIK. b) CENTRAL, panprising GRIESHEIM WERK I I (NORD) and another branch o f th e ALUMINIUM WERK. c) NORTH, I . G.FARBENINDUSTRIE ANALINFABRIK or GREPPINER WERKE.
d) NORTHWEST, I . G.FARBENINDUSTRIE (A^FA) FILMFABRIK a t WOLFEN.
O ther in d u s trie s in c lu d e en g in e e rin g , p ap er, and sto n e masonry, and in th e surrounding d i s t r i c t th e re are a number o f brown c o a l d e p o sits. Between th e two sm all v illa g e s o f Golpa and Zschornew itz, which l i e a few m iles to th e N o rth -east o f B itte r f e ld , i s th e second most im portant power s ta tio n in th e R eich.
T ran sp o rtatio n
M arshalling Yards Am Hauptbahnhof (2) The m arsh allin g and goods yards are n ear th e main s ta tio n , and can handle up to 2,000 wagons p e r 24 hours.
P u b lic U t ility S e rv ic e s
Elektrowerke A.G. Golpa-Zschom ew itz (1+) S itu ated between the two v illa g e s of GOLPA and ZSCHORNEWITZ and some 6 m iles N orth o f BITTERFELD, th e s ta tio n i s th e second la rg e s t in Gennany. The now s ta tio n , which was s t i l l under c o n s tru c tio n in August 1943, i s s itu a te d a d ja c e n t to th e o ld p la n t on th e West s id e ; i t i s e stim - a te d th a t i t s i n i t i a l c a p a c ity w ill be about 120 MW.
The o rig in a l s ta tio n has 16 tu rb o ­ g en erato r s e ts having an estim ated cap­ a c ity o f 434 MW.
There i s an indoor s u b -s ta tio n fo r 80 kV and 110 kV; a lso a 110 kV indoor sw itching s ta tio n n e a r th e g e n e ra tin g p la n t. No in p o rt a n t lo c a l su p p lie s a re given, but th e re a re 8 double c i r c u i t llOkV long d ista n c e lin e s which run to :
-70-
i
l) BERLIN-RUMMELSBURG (via PIESTERITZ) 2J BERLIN-SPANDAU (via BRANDENBURG) 6534?>))    EGIB^LOROBHOETLSKAESRN-KA AF(YTvN iWaA  EBR(KIvT iTa(EV ORGCFRKEOELBRDEO RDaSnE)d) LEIPZIG) (7) MAGDEBURG
(8) MAGDEBURG (via DESSAU and FORDERSTEDT) There i s also one 80 kV lin e to PIESTERITZ.
I.G . power sta tio n B itte r fe ld (1) The sta tio n i s owned by the I.G .FARBEN­ INDUSTRIE and is situated at the Southern end o f th e works complex, immediately West o f the aluminium works. I t i s also known as the BITTERFELD power statio n .
The output o f th e sta tio n i s m ainly, i f not w h olly, supplied to the I.G.works.
The cap acity o f the works has been d if f i c u lt to assess as there i s some doubt as to the number o f generator s e ts , however i t i s estim ated that there are 7 generator se ts w ith a cap acity 140 W . The sta tio n i s connected to 110 kV lin es from GCLPA-ZSCHORNEVTITZ to BÖHLEN and GROSS-KAYNA.
I.G . power sta tio n Wollen (1) Also known as th e WOLFEN power sta tio n , i t i s owned by the I.G.FARBENINDUSTRIE and situ ated at th e Northern end o f th e com­ p lex , between the chemical and the dye­ s tu ff fa cto rie s at WOLFEN. The output o f th e sta tio n i s m ainly, i f not w h olly, supplied to the I.G .w orks. Owing t o the doubt e x istin g as to the number o f gen­ erato rs i t i s d i f f i c u l t to assess the ca p a city , however i t i s estim ated th at there are 6 generator se ts having a cap­ a c ity o f 98 W . The sta tio n i s connected to the HO kV lin es from GOLPA-ZSCHORNEWITZ to BÖHLEN and GROSS-KAYNA.
Muldenstein B itte r fe ld (1) The Kraftwerk Muldenstein l ie s a few m iles to th e North’ east o f the town.
It has a cap acity o f 81 MW and supplies th e railw ay system in t h is d i s t r i c t .
I t i s owned by the Reichsbahn.
S o lid Fuels
Braunkohlen Werke B itte rfe ld (3) The larg e brown coal deposits in th is area are exploited by severa l firm s, among the most important are the B itte rfe ld Louisen- grube, owned by Leopold A .G ., the I.G .
Farben, Grube Theodor and the Grube Golpa.
71 -
Production is estimated, a t a rate o f about S m illion tons o f brown coal and. 600,000 tons o f briquetiAs per annum*
“ 72 -
Non-Ferrous Metals Manufacture and Fabrication I.G. Farbenindustrie A.G.
The I.G. Farbenindustrie concern have a large concentration of their non-ferrous metal and chemical plants in the Bitterfeld area which are estimated to employ a total of some 50,000 workers. These works are of very great importance to the German war industry. There are three large aluminium and magnesium factories in Bitterfeld itself which are described below.
Ground reports suggest that aero-engine components and aircraft components as well as airscrews are now also produced at the I.G. Farbenindustrie works at Bitterfeld.
The Southern works has been mentioned in this connection.
Light Metal Plants. Bitterfeld There is an important group of metallurgical plants in Bitterfeld which are now merged in the I.G. Farben concern. These plants produce aluminium, magnesium and light alloy semi-manufactured products and are situated in the Central and Southern areas of Bitterfeld.
There are two plants producing aluminium metal, one producing magnesium and several units which produce aluminium alloys, the various magnesium alloys grouped under the trade name "Elektron" and semi manufactured products in light alloys. All the metallurgical works mentioned below are included in this group.
Aluminiumwerk I. Bitterfeld (1) The first of the two plants operated by the subsidiary firm Aluminiumwerk G.m.b.H. is situated in the Southern quarter of the industrial area and has been in operation since 1916. It was considerably enlarged during the years 1934 to 1938 and its present capacity is estimated at 15,000 tons of aluminium annually.
Aluminiumwerk II Bitterfeld (1) The second plant of the Aluminiumwerk G.m.b.H. dates from 1936 and is in the Central area of Bitterfeld.
The capacity is believed to be 20,000 tons of aluminium per annum.
Griesheim Bitterfeld (1) The Chemische Fabrik Griesheim Elektion which was merged into the I.G. Farben concern in 1925 operates a magnesium plant situated in the Southern quarter of the industrial area. This plant has an annual capacity which is believed to be at least 5000 tons.
Light Alloys Bitterfeld (1) Both in the Central and the Southern areas there are a number of plants, associated with the three main units mentioned above, which produce and fabricate light alloys and semi manufactured products. These various plants are believed to have been considerably extended during recent years.
- 73 -
Chemicals and Explosives I. G. Farbenindustrie A.G.
The I. G. Farben concern has three large chemical works in Bitterfeld, one of which, the Griesheim Elektron II forms a part of the non-ferrous metal factory mentioned above* In the town of Wolfen which lies some 5 miles to the North west of Bitterfeld are two further large chem­ ical plants one of which is the main factory of the Agfa photographic film company.
Griesheim Elektron Werk I Bitterfeld (1) The Chemische Fabrik Griesheim Elektron I is in the centre of the town on the West­ ern side of the railway. The plant produced in 1943:- 4% (80,000 tons) of Germany’s sulphuric acid, 37*5% (150,000 tons) of her caustic soda, 37.5% (135,000 tons) of her chlorine, and 5.2% (70,000 tons) of her nitric acid (65%) output.
Griesheim Electron Werk II Bitterfled (2) The Chemische Fabrik Griesheim Elektron Werk II, which is part of the Non-Ferrous Metals plant is in the Northern part of Bitterfeld immediately to the North of the aluminium plant. It produces small quantities of chlorine and magnesium* Salzbergwerk Bitterfeld (2) The Salzbergwerk Neu Stassfurt lies to the South west of the town. It is reported to be manufacturing toxic gases and electro­ lytic products for the chemical and metall­ urgical industries.
I .G. Farbenindustrie (Agfa) Wolfen (1) The plant, situated about 5 miles North west of Bitterfeld, is owned by AKTIEN GESELLSCHAFT für ANILIN FABRIKATION (AGFA) which is a member of the I. G. FARBENINDUSTRIE.
In 1939 it was the largest film producing unit in Europe; it is now believed to make 90% of Germany’s aero film and 60% of her cine film. Other products are reported to be colour film, filters, plates, photographic chemicals and film base. This is the most important of the Agfa plants.
- 74 -
Elektro-Schmelze G.m,b. H. Zschornewitz (1) The plant is by far the larg est producer of aluminium oxide abrasives in Axis Europe, but i t manufactures no wheels and no silicon carbide. I t provides screened and roasted grains to the German grinding wheel plants.
Its output was about 10,000 tons per annum u n til 1937 > when a big expansion programme was put into effect. I ts output today is unknown, but th is plant now probably accounts for about 50% of German production (say 15>000 tons per annum).
Farbewerke Wolfen (2) The plant is owned by the I. G. FARBEN concern and lie s immediately North of the Wolfen power station. I t is estim­ ated th at i t produced in 1943 20,000 tons (1% of to ta l German output) of sulphuric acid, and 60,000 tons (4.5% of Germany’s output) of n itr ic acid (65^).
-------o0o——-
-75-
BLECHHAMMER (Upper Silesia) * 50° 201 N. 18° 181 E: 800 miles: (25,000) Blechhammer which lies on the Klodnitz Canal, sane 10 miles East of Ko sei has become noteworthy during the past two years owing to the erection of two highly important synthetic oil plants.
These are believed, to be owned, by I. G. Farbenindustrie and. were first reported, as under construction in 194-1. There is another synthetic oil plant 9 miles to the North which is described under Deschowitz.
Public Utility Services.
Blechhamner North Blechhammer (1)
This thermal power station is believed to be owned by I.G.Farbenindustrie and supplies Blechhammer North hydrogenation plant. It is now fully completed and has an estimated capacity of 250 MW.
Reigersfeld (Blechhammer South^ Reigersfeld (1)
A second and larger power station is situated in the area of hydrogenation plant. It is being rapidly completed, and is believed to have a capacity of 300 MW. (see also below).
Liquid Fuels and Substitutes
Blechhammer North Blechhammer (1) The hydrogenation plant known as Blechhammer North is situated immediately South of the village. It is already producing some 250,000 tons of synthetic fuel per annum, but is not likely to be completed until the autumn of 1944, when its output capacity will be 500,000 tons per annum. The large electricity station belonging to this plant is mentioned above under "Public Utilities".
Reigersfeld (Blechhammer South) Reigersfeld (1)
This plant, which is the larger and more important of the two, is situated immediately North of Reigersfeld station and East of the Oppeln-Ratibor railway, and to the South of the Kosel-Gleiwitz line. It has been known previously as Blechhammer South. I.*G.Farben­ industrie are believed to control the plant whose annual capacity is at present about 400,000 tons. It is estimated that, on completion in the late summer of 1944-, the annual capacity will be about 750,000 tons per annum.
---- oOo-----
- 76 -
BOCHOLT (Westphalia)
51° 50’ N, 6° 40« E: 290 miles: (35,000) Bocholt is near the Dutch Frontier on a branch line leading from Wesel to Bredevoort in Holland, The town is chiefly a textile centre, but none of the numerous spinning and weaving plants in the area are individually of importance.
Transportation.
Railway Repair Shops Bocholt (j) These are medium sized repair shops engaged on the repair and maintenance of locomotives and goods wagons.
-- — -o0o— ---- BOCHUM (Westphalia) 51° 30' N. 7° 15’ E; J20 miles: (336,000) The area covered by this report is situated in the centre of the Ruhr industrial area; it is bounded in the North by Riemke and Bövinghausen, covers Hattingen in the South, Werne and the Western half of Langendreer in the East, Bochum itself and Weitmar in the West.
Bochum with a population of J20,000 is one of the chief centres of the coal and iron industry, there are important steelworks and approximately JO per cent of the Ruhr coal is produced here.
Like other areas of the Ruhr the Bochum district has an extensive rail transport system with major marshalling yards at Langendreer and Dahlhausen.
There is only one important electricity power station in this area, but it is of outstanding significance in the Ruhr network. This is the 126 MW station at Hattingen. There are several local subsidiary stations of 10 to 20 MW at the pits.
The principal industries are coal mining, with the usual accompani­ ment of coking plants and their by-products, as well as iron and steel manufacture. At Bochum are to be found the large steel and armaments works of the Bochumer Verein (Vereinigte Stahlwerke) viz:
Werk Gusstahlfabrik Werk Höntrop Werk Stahlindustrie Werk Weitmar
as well as large engineering concerns.
Oil is represented at Bochum by three tar distillation plants.
There are smaller concentrations at Hattingen which has a population of 16,000 and contains a large steel plant, and at Langendreer.
Transportation
Marshalling Yard Riemke (j) The yards lie 2 m. N.N.W. of Bochum main station and have a capacity of J,200 wagons per 24 hours.
- 77 -
BOCHUM (contd.) Marshalling Yards Langendreer (2) Situated 4 m. East of Bochum main station; the capacity of the yards was 5,000 wagons per 24 hours.
Marshalling Yards Dalhausen (3) These yards are on the North bank of the River Ruhr, 4^ m. South West of Bochum station; 3,600 wagons could be handled per 24 hours.
Public Utility Services V.E.W. power Station Hattingen (1) The "Gemeinschaftswerk Hattingen” G.m.b. H. is on the South bank of the River Ruhr, 1£ miles South East of Hattingen, Altogether there are 8 turbo­ generator sets with a total capacity of 126 MW.
There are also 3 indoor substations containing transformers, and in addition a 110 kV. outdoor switching station. Underground cables supply local industries (10 kV) and Wuppertal (25 kV).
Long distance power is supplied to the R.W.S. grid (50 kV), a 110 kV line is connected to Essen, Witten and other towns, and the 220 kV line from Herdecke to Leithe may be connected to Hattingen. This is one of the four main stations serving the Ruhr industrial area. The others are Karnap (see Essen), Gersteinwerk (Hann) and Reisholz (Düsseldorf).
Municipal Gas Works Bochum (3) Situation; North East of the main station, between Orenstein und Koppel and the "Stahlindustrie” works. The works took 550 million cubic feet of gas over the V.E.W. grid in 1936.
Gusstahlfabrik Power Station Bochum (3) Owned by the Bochumer Verein iron and steel works, this thermal power station has capacity of 25 MW.
HenrichshCLtte Power Station Hattingen (3) Situated at the Hattingen steelworks, five miles South of Bochum, it has a capacity of 25 MW.
Robert Müser Power Station Werne (3) Situated at the colliery 3j miles East of Bochum station, the plant is believed to have a capacity of 30 MW.
- 78 -
BOCHUM (Contd)
Präsident power Station N.W,Bochum (3) Owned by Bergbau A.G. Lothringen, the works have a capacity of 21 MW. and are situated 1 m. West of Bochum main station.
Constantin der Grosse power Station Gerthe-Heide (j) Owned by the Deutsche Erdöl A.G. Situated at Pits 6/7 at Gerthe-Heide, 2^ m. N.N.E. of Bochum main station, this thermal plant has a capacity of 11 MW.
Prinz Regent Power Station E. Weitmar (j) Situated one mile East of Weitmar, and 1^- m.
South of Bochum main station, this thermal plant is the main distribution centre for the Bochum group of companies owned by the Gelsenkirchener Bergwerks A.G.
Solid Fuels
Constantin der Grosse 1/2 coking plant N.W.Bochum (3) Owned by Gewerkschaft "Verein Constantin der Grosse” the plant is situated 2 m. North of Bochum main station. There are 90 coke ovens with an estimated annual capacity amounting to 100,000 tons of dried coal.
Constantin der Grosse 6/7 coking plant Gerthe (3) Situated adjoining Pit 6/7, 2$ m. N.N.E. of Bochum main station, the plant is owned by Gewerkschaft "Verein Constantin der Grosse” (Fr. Krupp A.G»). There are 120 ovens having an estimated annual rated capacity of 340,000 tons of dry coal.
Constantin der Grosse 10 coking plant Gerthe-Heide (3) This plant, adjoining Pit 10, is situated 3ä m. N.N.E. of Bochum main station and has 56 coke ovens with an estimated annual capacity of 450,000 tons of dry coal. Gas is supplied to the Ruhr gas grid.
Lothringen 4 coking plant Hiltrop-Wanne (3) Owned by Bergbau A.G. Lothringen the plant is situated 3 m. North Eas c of Bochum main station. It consists of 130 ovens with an annual dry coal capacity of 330,000 tons. Gas is supplied to the Ruhr gas grid. (See also "Liquid Fuels" and the collieries above. )
- 79 -
BOCHUM (contd.)
Carolinenglück coking plant Hamm (2) The coking plant is in the Bochum group of Gelsenkirchener Bergwerke A.G. and is situated 2 m. North West of Bochum station.
The plant consists of 225 ovens with an annual dry coal capacity of 890,000 tons. (See also under "Liquid Fuels")
Präsident coking plant N.W. Bochum (3) Owned by Bergbau A.G, Lothringen, the coking plant, situated 1 m. West of Bochum main station, consists of 70 ovens with an annual rated dry coal capacity of 148,000 tons, also produces gas and by-products. The company has its own power station (see also under "Public Utility Services".)
Bruchstrasse coking plant Langendreer (3) This coking plant is another of the Bochum group of Gelsenkirchener Bergwerke A.G. and is situated 4i m. East of Bochum main station.
The plant comprises 72 ovens with an annual rated dry coal capacity of 511,000 tons. The principal by-products won are ammonia, tar and benzol. Some 1,800 workers are employed.
The plant has its own power station.
Mansfeld coking plant Werne (3) Also known as "KoIonia", the coking plant, owned by Mansfeld A.G. , is situated 3i m. of Bochum station, and comprises 220 ovens with a maximum rated dry coal capacity of 400,000 tons annually. The plant has its own power plant with, a capacity of 7 MW.
Dannenbaum coking plant East of Bochum (j) Another of the Bochum groups of Ga 1 senk jrebener Bergwerks A. G, , it is situated 2 m. East of Bochum main station, the plant consists of 65 ovens with an annual rated dry coal capacity of 200,000 tons.
Robert Mttser coking plant Werne (2) Located adjoining the colliery, 3^ m. E.N.E. of Bochum main station, the plant consists of 205 ovens which have an annual dry coal capacity of 1,200,000 tons. See the colliery of the same name (below).
Henrichshdtte Coking Plant Hattingen (j) Situated 5 miles South of Bochum at the Henrichshutte steelworks of the Ruhrstahl A. G. group of Vereinigte Stahlwerke A. G» , the plant consists of 100 ovens with an annual rated dry coal capacity of 430,000 tons. \ ,
- 80 -
BOCHUM (Contd)
Constantin der Grosse Collieries (2) Situated North of Bochum» the Gewerkschaft "Verein Constantin der Grosse” has pits nunbered 1,2,2A,J ,4/5,6/7,8/9 and 10/11.
The output of these mines was 2,127,000 tons of hard coal in 1937. (The coking plant is mentioned above and the power station under "Public Utilities").
Lothringen Colliery, pits 1/3/j and 4/5 N.of Bochum-Gerthe (2) The Bergbau A. G. Lothringen collieries are situated roughly North of Gerthe. In 1937 their output of hard coal amounted to 1,540,000 tons. (See also under "Liquid Fuels” and "Chemicals").
Robert Mttser colliery W. Werne (2) Owned by the Harpener Bergbau A. G. , the mine is situated 3i m. E.N.E. of Bochum main station. The colliery is an amalgamation of the following pits;- Amalia, Arnold Jakob, Caroline, Heinrich Gustav, Prinz von Preussen and Vollmond.
In 1937 1,370,000 tons of hard coal were produced, (power station, see under "Public Utilities". The coking plant is mentioned above).
Liquid Fuels and Substitutes Lothringen 1/2 Gerthe (j) Owned by the Bergbau A. G, Lothringen, this distillation plant is situated 4j m. North East of Bochum main station, it is capable of producing the full range of products, but is probably mainly engaged on different grades of fuel oil. (See also under "Solid Fuels" and under "Chemicals").
Lothringen 4 Hiltrop-Wanne (3) The distillation plant is owned by Bergbau A. G» Lothringen and is located J m. North East of Bochum main station, adjoining the coke oven (see under "Solid Fuels").
CarolinenglÜck distillation plant Hamme (-) Owned by Gelsenkirchener Bergwerke A.G. (Bochum group) this plant is situated 2 m.
North West of Bochum main station adjoining the coking ovens, the plant produces the usual by-products, the chief of these being benzol.
- 81 -
BOCHUM (contd. )
Iron and Steel and Ferro-alloys
Werk Gusstahlfabrik N. of Allee Str. (1)
Part of the Bochumer Verein group, owned by Vereinigte Stahlwerke A. G. , the steel works are situated less than a mile North West of Bochum main station. The extensive works complex has a frontage of about one mile and a depth of half a mile. There are 4 blast furnaces and 15 Open hearth furnaces. The annual capacity of the works is estimated at 850,000 tons per annum of pig iron and 700,000 tons per annum of crude steel.
Electric steel is also produced. It is one of the main German consumers of refined nickel. Steel castings are a special product of the works. Other products include gun- . barrels, complete artillery pieces, and armoured plate. The complex includes foundries, forges, mills and shops for rails, wheels, springs, boilers, switches and axles.
Products include tank wheels, bomb tail units, and welded tubes for submarine components.
The works has its own power plant ( see under «Public Utilities«). 12 to 1J,000 hands are employed, working in three shifts.
Werk Höntrop W. of Bochum (1) One of the Bochumer Verein group, owned by Vereinigte Stahlwerke, the works is situated li m. West of Bochum main station. It has 4 open-hearth furnaces with an annual capacity of 500,000 tons of crude steel.
The works has a rolling mills capable of handling the whole of its steel output, and the finished products cover the usual range.
The work*s special product is tubes.
Werk Weitmar S.E. Bochum (j) Part of the Bochumer Verein group of Vereinigte Stahlwerke A. G. , the steel works are situated 1^- m. E. S.E. of Bochum main station. There are 7 Open-hearth furnaces with a crude steel capacity estimated at 100,000 tons per annum. The rolling mills are capable of absorbing the whole of the steel output. Steel castings are the speciality of the works.
The works employ about 800 workers.
- 82 -
BOCHUM (contd)
Eisen und Hüttenwerke A.G* N.E. of Bochum (1) Owned by the Otto Wolff Group the works situated m. North East of Bochum station. There are 3 Open-hearth furnaces having an annua] estimated capacity of 150,000 tons of crude steel.
The rolling mills are capable of handling the entire steel output. In addition to the normal range of finished products, the works manufactures chromium - molybdenum and chromium - nickel steel. 5,000 workers are employed.
Henrichshtttte Hattingen (1) Situated adjoining the railway on the South bank of the River Ruhr and 5 South of Bochum, the works are part of the Bochumer Verein group of Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G» There are 2 blast furnaces with an estimated annual pig iron capacity of 250,000 tons; and 8 Open-hearth furnaces having a capacity of approximately 250,000 tons of crude steel per annum. The rolling mills and shops in addition to the usual range of products are said to be making tank bodies and submarine components. About 5,000 workers are employed.
The works has its own power station (see also under "Public Utilities").
Engineering and Armaments Werk Stahlindustrie S.of Allee Str. (1) Situated North West of the main station between the main line and Allee Strasse, the Stahlindustrie works is part of the Bochumer Verein group of Vereinigte Stahlwerke. The works comprise mills and shops making the usual range of products, and in addition chromium - molybdenum and chromium - nickel steel, they also make drop forgings.
Westfalia Dinnendahl Groppel A.G» Bochum (2) The works are known as the Werk Westfalia and are situated immediately adjoining Bochum station to the North East. They manufacture railway and mining equipment and also grinding and cutting machines. 2,000 workers are employed.
Westfalia Dinnendahl Gröppel Reimke (2) (Werke Gröppel)
These works are 2i m. North of Bochum main station and are presumed to be producing the same products as Werk Westfalia. In addition to those listed above, the firm produces coal cleaning and ore dressing plant, mine ventilators and shaft winding equipment.
-83 -
BOCHUM (contd) ,
Maschinen, und Bahribedarf A.G-. Bochum (3)
Formerly Orenstein & Koppel, the works are situated to the North West and adjoining Bochum main station. The works make railway equipment, and have a capacity of 20,000 field wagons per annum. 800 workers are employed.
Gebrüder Eidkhaff Hunscheidtsfeld (3) The Gebrüder Eickhoff Maschinenfabrik und Eisengiesserei works are situated m. South of Bochum main station. They are important manufacturers of mining machinery including coal cutting and ore dressing plant; compressors are also made. Roughly 1 ,000 workers are employed.
Fahrzeug-Werk Lu eg Bochum (3) Situated adjoining and North East of Bochum main station, the .firm manufactures motor car bodies.
Drahtwerke Langendreer Langendreer (3) Owned by the Westfälische Union A.G. für Eisen- und Drahtindustrie group of Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G., the works are situated at Langendreer 4 m. East of Bochum main station, and they manufacture high grade steel wire and wire products and are believed to be making heavy bomb cases.
G. Wolff Jr. G.m.bjl. Linde (3)
Manufacturers of mining and coke oven machinery, they are located L m. South West of Bochum main station.
Balcke Maschinenbau A.G. Bochum (3) Manufacturers of pumps and compressors, the works are situated m. North West of Bochum main station.
Chemicals and Explosives
Lothringen 5 Gerthe (3) Owned by Bergbau A.G. Lothringen, this timber impregnation plant is situated adjoinir^ Lothringen Pit 5, 3t m. North East of Boahum main station. The plant impregnates railway sleepers; there is a large timber yard.
>«o0o<
- 84 -
BOBLINGEN (Wurttemberg) 48° 40’ N; 9° E: 450 miles; (15,000) Boblingen is 8 miles South West of Stuttgart on the main line from Stuttgart to Schaffhausen and Zurich, There are a few engineering firms and textile factories, but the two important aircraft works mentioned below form the main industry of the town, Flugzeugwerke Boblingen (3) The Hans Klemm Leichtflugzeugbau G, m.b.H, employed approxim; 500 workers before the war and were building the K.L, 35, a two-seater training and towing plane in two versions; one with a Hirth 60R engine (70-80 h. p,) and one with a Hirth 504 engine (90-100 h.p.) Their output of these in 1938 was 10 monthly.
In July 1942 it was reported that the Boblingen factory was employing 1,200 workers on the production of training aircraft and gliders.
Ground intelligence suggests that this factory is working in association with the Daimler- Benz A.G. branch at Sindelfingen, ------0O0-----
BOHLEN (Saxony) See under LEIPZIG,
------0O0-----
BOMLITZ (Hanover) See under Hanover
•-0O0-
- 85 -
BO N N (Rhineland) 50° 45* N. 7° 5’ E: 320 miles; (100,000) Bonn is on the le ft bank of the Rhine and on one of the main lines from Cologne to Southern Germany. It is a junction for Euskirchen and Düren. Bonn is chiefly a University town, but contains a number of small industries, including metals, chemicals, engineering, and foodstuffs. The only firms of individual importance are mentioned below.
Transportation Railway T raffic Centre Bonn (3) This tra ffic centre includes goods yards, shunting and large storage accomodation.
Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication Leichtmetallwerke Am Nordbahnhof (2) The Bonn factory, which is situated on the West side of the railway near the Nordbahnhof, was formerly the main works of the Vereinigte Leichtmetallwerke G-. m.b.H. These have now been part­ ly transferred to Hannover, but the Bonn plant continues as a branch works and is engaged on the fabrication of light metal alloys for the a ircra ft industry. It is also reported to be making bomb components, bodies for incendiary bombs, and fuzes. The works were damaged in an early raid, but have since been repaired and enlarged.
Engineering and Armaments Rhewema
Bonn (-)
The Rheinische Werkzeug und Maschinenfabrik G.m.b, H. (Rhewema), whose parent works are in Krefeld, normally employ about 150 workers on the manufacture of various types of precision tools, including tw ist d r ills , pumps, reamers and m illing machinery.
- -------- 0 O 0 ------------
B O R N A (Saxory) See under Leipzig.
------------ 0 O 0 — -------
- 86 -
B O T T R O P (Westphalia) 51° 30* N. 6° 55* E: J10 miles: (86,000) The area covered is roughly the adm inistrative d is tr ic t of Bottrop. The Northern boundary is approximately p a ra lle l to and one mile North of the autobahn; the Southern boundary being the Emscher Canal. In the E ast, Kolonie Rheinbaben and Kolonie Welheim are included; the Westphalian-Rhineland provincial boundary forms the Western boundary.
There is a largo e le c tric a l power statio n which is connected to the principal in d u strial targ e t - the Ruhröl synthetic o il plant at Bottrop-Welheim. Southeast of Bottrop are the two "Prosper" c o llie rie s and the coking plant.
The Emscher canal is not navigable and is used only for drainage.
Public U tility Services Ruhröl Power Station Bottrop-Welheim (1) This thermal power statio n is situated adjoining and just North of the synthetic o il p lan t, 2^ miles North East of Bottrop station. I t has an estimated capacity of 100 MW, There is an indoor substation adjacent to the generating plant. Power is supplied to the o il plant by low and medium voltage cables; steam is also supplied to i t from the generating plant. The e le c tric a l demands of the o il plant are estimated at 75 MW. and the annual consumption at 550 m illion kWh. One high voltage overhead line probably connects with the Essen-Karnap sta tio n , while another is connected to the Hamborn substation. (See also under "Liquid Fuels". ) Municipal Gas Works Bottrop (3) Situated North West of Bottrop main sta tio n , the municipal gas works handles 101 m illion cubic feet of gas per annum.
Solid Fuels Prosper coking ovens East of Bottrop (2) Owned by Rheinische Stahlwerke A.G. the plant is situ ated at prosper P it 4 1J miles East North East of Bottrop station. There are J15 ovens with a rated dry coal capacity of 1,860,000 tons per annum.
Brosper C olliery, P its 1 and 2 South East of Bottrop(2) These p its are situated East of Bottrop sta tio n ; in 1937 output was 1,827,000 tons of hard coal.
The mine also has its own power station (30MW).
Prosper C olliery, p i t 3 South of Bottrop (2) This p it is situated South of Bottrop station and produced 1,582,000 tons of hard coal in > 1937.
- 87 -
Liquid Fuels Ruhröl A. Gw Bottrop-Kelheim (2) The synthetic o i l plant i s situated 2^ m iles North East of Bottrop station , and 1 mile West o f Horst Nord. I t is owned by Rührol ’ A.G. and covers an area o f 150 acres. The raw materials are Pott-Brocke extract and pitch. Bergius capacity i s 100,000 tons'.
The company is controlled by Matthias Stinnes G.m.b.H. and the Mülheimer Bergwerke A.G.
Products are p etro l, g a s-o il, and lubricants.
The plant has i t s own power station (see under "Public U tilitie s " ). —-—oOo-—— B 0 U S (Saar)
Engineering and Armaments Mannesmann Bous (2) The Mannesmann Röhrenwerke A, G. at Bous sp ecialize in the manufacture o f compressed cylinders, various types o f pipings, sections and fittin g s. Since the war one or more departments are engaged on the productions of bomb casings. 2,000 to 3,000 workers are employed.
-——oOo-——
B R A C K W E D E (Westphalia) 52° N. 8° 30* E: 370 m iles (15,000) Brackwede is on a branch railway some 5 m iles South of B ielefeld , The town’s a c tiv itie s include engineering firms and chemical works, but apart from those mentioned below, none are of individual importance.
Engineering and Armaments Metalltüren Brackwede (3) The Deutsche Metalltüren August Schwarz A. G. are normally manufacturers of ste e l doors, safes, and a l l types of presses. The parent works of the company are in Brackwede, and there is a branch factory in Berlin. In 1938 the two plants employed a to ta l o f some 700 workers, and they are now reported to be producing components for tanks and A.F.V’s.
- 88 -
Kanmerich-Werke Brackwede (j) The Kammerich-Werke A.G. normally employ 1,000 •workers on the manufacture of steel tubes and components for pressing and stamping machinery.
Presswerke Brackwede (j) The Ruhrstahl Presswerke A.G., whose parent works are in Witten, are a subsidiary of the Ver.Stahlwerke A.G. of Düsseldorf. The Brackwede plant manufactures automobile components, and apparatus for the food and chemicals industries.
-------0O0-------
- 89 -
BRANDENBURG (Brandenburg)
52° 25’ N. 12® JO’ E: 545 miles: (76,900) Brarr*enburg an der Havel is 50 miles West of Berlin on the railway from Berlin to Magdeburg. The town is divided by the river Havel into two sections. The Altstadt on the right bank has largely preserved its mediaeval character and is a closely built area. The Neustadt on the left bank of the Havel is the chief shopping and comaercial quarter. Brandenburg has had a considerable industrial development in recent years, notably through the expansion of the Arado aircraft works and the Opel factory. In addition to these firms, and to the iron and steel and engineering works described below, the industries also include chemicals, textiles and leather.
Transportation.
Railway Repair Shops Brandenburg- (1) West
These large railway workshops are situated in the Western quarter of the town adjacent to, and South of the Altstadt station. They are believed to employ several thousand workers on the repair and maintenance of rolling stock and locomotives.
Iron and Steel
F. Flick K.G. Brandenburg (2) The Mitteldeutsche Stahl & Walzwerk F. FlickJLG., whose parent works are in Dusseldorf, have at Branden­ burg a large steelworks and rolling mill, where 5,000 workers are employed on the manufacture of armour plate for ships, submarine hulls, and A.F.V.’s. The open hearth furnaces of this plant have a capacity of 500,000 tons of steel per annum.
Public Utility Services
tt Städtisches Gaswerk Brandenburg (5) In 1957 this gas works carbonised 11,000 tons of coal and sold 197 million cubic feet of gas.
Switching Station Brandenburg (5) This is a substation on the 220 kV Brauweiler-Spandau line. It is situated in open country beyond the outskirts of Brandenburg.
It is not certain that there is a tapping from the line at Brandenburg.
If there is it would be used to re­ inforce the supply to this town and the adjacent area.
- 90 -
Aircraft and Aero Engines
Ar ado Arado
Brandenburg Neuendorf
( d)
The Arado Flugzeugwerke G.nub.H. have their main factory at Brandenburg.
The works are divided into two sections by an aerodrome some 2j kms. in length, which lies on the right side of the road leading from Brandenburg to Plaue. These sections are known respectively as Arado Brandenburg and Arado Neuendorf. The two plants are reported to employ a total of some 6,500 workers on the production of aircraft, particularly HE-177, and various types of training and reconnaissance planes. These works undertake the entire production and assembly of HE-177 and have their own research and designing department.
Engineering and Armaments
Opel
Brandenburg (2)
The well known German motor manufacturers of Adam Opel ^.G., whose parent works are at Russels­ heim, have their chief branch factory at Brandenburg, where some J,000 to 4,000 workers are reported to be employed on the production of heavy lorries, A.F.V’s and other types of military transport.
Brennabor Brandenburg (2) The Brennabor Werke A.G. formerly made a small type of motor car but in 1933 their factory was largely converted to the manufacture of components for the motor and other industries. It is believed that they now produce bicycles and light military transport and are reported to employ some 5,000 workers.
-------oOo------
- 91 -
B R A U B A C H (Rhineland)
(3,400)
Braubach l i e s J m iles S.E. o f Koblenz on th e opposite side o f the Rhine- The only nameworthy in d u s tr ia l e sta b lish m e n t in th is town i s the zinc works m entioned below: - N on-ferrous m etals B le i-u . S ilb e rh ü tte Braubach Braubach (}) C o n tro lled by M e ta llg e s e lls c h a ft A.G. F ra n k fo rt through B e rz e liu s M etallh ü tten G.m.b.H. T his works produces p re c io u s m e ta ls, crude and re fin e d le a d and z in c . I t s annual c a p a c ity i s estim ated to be 45,000 to n s o f crude le a d and 45,000 to n s o f r e fin e d le a d .
- --------- oOo-----------
BRAUNSBERG- (E ast P ru ssia)
54° 20* N. 19° 50* E: 855 m iles: (18,000)
M
Braunsberg l i e s on th e main railw ay from Danzig to K onigsberg, and i s a Ju n ctio n f o r Mehlsack and th e B a ltic town o f Frauenberg. The town’s only in d u s trie s a re a few sm all le a th e r works, none o f which are w orthy o f n o te.
- --------- o O o ---------
BRAUNSCHWEIG (Brunswick)
Braunschweig, o r Brunswick, on th e r i v e r Oker, i s th e chief town o f th e S ta te o f th e same name. I t i s s itu a te d on th e f e r t i l e p la in N orth o f th e H artz M ountains and l i e s in th e r i c h a g ric u ltu ra l d i s t r i c t o f th e A lle r b a s in . The town i s th e p r in c ip a l m arketing c e n tre f o r th e c o rn , su g ar, v e g e ta b le s and c a t t l e o f th e a re a . The in n e r town i s a w e ll p reserv ed s u rv iv a l o f m ediaeval days w ith many h a lf-tim b e re d houses.
In e a rly y e a rs Brunswick was a ro ad ju n c tio n on th e trade ro u te from Hamburg to Southern Germany and th e town s t i l l re ta in s its im portance as a conm unications c e n tre . I t i s on th e railw ay midway between Magdeburg and Hannover w ith through connections to th e B altic and N orth Sea c o a st. Brunswick i s lin k ed by i t s harbour w ith the M itte lla n d Canal and th u s has d ir e c t access to Germany*a extensive in la n d waterways system .
Form erly Brunswick *s c h ie f s p e c ia lity was th e p reserv atio n o f fo o d s tu ffs and i t i s s t i l l an im p o rtan t s u p p lie r o f th e armed forces.
- 92 -
BRAUNSCHWEIG (contd).
The town has, however, now become of outstanding importance owing to the development of the aircraft and engineering industries. There are two large aircraft works in the town and two equally important works in the outlying districts of Querum and Waggum which lie within the administrat­ ive area. The industrial plants in Brunswick are mainly grouped in the southern quarter of the town in the neighbourhood of the railway yards and in the northern outskirts where there are several factories chiefly engaged in engineering.
Shortly before the war the Hermann Goring concern erected a huge steel plant in the village of Hallendorf some 8 miles South West of Brunswick. This plant is one of the largest of its kind in the Reich and the industrial importance of Brunswick increased still further after its construction. For this reason these works are included in the targets listed below, although they are situated well beyond the boundaries of the town. The plant is extensively provided with road and rail communications linki ng it through Brunswick with other parts of Germany.
Transportation
Inland Port Veltenhof (j) Some two miles North of Brunswick and included in the town adminis­ trative area is the village of Veltenhof near which is situated a small inland port. This port is linked by the river Oker with Brunswick in the south and the Mittelland Canal in the north.
Marshalling lards Brunswick-Sui (2) In the southern part of the town is a large marshalling yard which has recently been considerably extended. It is of particular importance as a transport centre for the Hermann Goring works at Hallendorf and for this purpose a new bridge over the river Oker has been constructed to carry the lines further West. The marshalling yards in the eastern quarter of the town Brunswick-Ost (3) deal mainly with normal freight traffic.
Public Utility Services
Kraftwerk Hallendorf Hallendorf (1) This thermal power station is owned by the Hermann Goering steel works and is their principal source of power. It has a capacity of 260 MW. and is the eighth largest power station in the Reich.
- 93 -
BRAUNSCHWEIG (contd.)
Municipal Power Station Brunswick (3)
This is a thermal power plant belong­ ing to the A.E.G. concern and has a capacity of JQ MW.
Municipal Gas Works Brunswick (3)
The municipal gasworks of Brunswick had in 1937 a turnover of about 600 mi Ilion cubic feet of gas«
Solid Fuels
Salzgitter Coking Plant Hallendorf (2)
This coking plant is included in the site of the Hermann Goring steel works and had 220 ovens working in 1943 when its maximum rated dry coal capacity was said to be 1,550,000 tons. A further 220 ovens are planned.
Iron and Steel
Hermann Goring Hallendorf (1 +)
The Reichs^erke A.G. fur Erzbergbau und Eisenhütten Hermann Goring have at Hallendorf one of the largest steel plants in Germany. Although construction started before the war the works are still incomplete but are being rapidly extended. The site is built in two units and the Huttenabteilung includes a coking plant, a large by-products plant, gasholders, blast furnaces, steel plants and rolling mills. The works are reported to produce two million tons of pig iron and two million tons of Thomas and Siemens steel per annum. A branch canal is under construction to connect with the Mittelland Canal and the works have their own power station (see above). Additional roads and railway lines are being built to link the plant with Brunswick and other parts of Germany. Some 20,000 workers were reported to be employed here in 1942 and that number has probably now been considerably increased.
- 94 -
BRAUNSCHWEIG (contd. ) • Aircraft and Aero-Engines
Büssing-N. A. G. (NIEMD) Querum (2) Formerly known as the Nieders&chische < Motorenwerke G.nub. H. , this plant is situated in the Querumer Wald in the Northern outskirts of Brunswick. It is engaged on the production of the Daimler Benz D.B. 601 aero-engine, and is reported to employ some 4,000 workers.
The factory is located in the southern part of the wood. The site is heavily camouflaged and considerable extensions to the testing sheds and other plants have been made.
Hermann Göring Lamme (2) Some two miles to the West of Brunswick and included in the town's administrative .area, is the small village of Lamne near which is situated the aircraft works and testing laboratory of the Luftfahrtforschungs- Anstalt Hermann Göring. This is chiefly an aircraft research and testing plant but recent reports suggest that planes are now being manufactured there.
Flugzeugreparaturfabrik G.m.b.H. Zimmer str. (J) These works are reported to employ several hundred workers on the manufacture of aircraft components and the repair of aircraft, particularly wings.
M.I.A.G. Waggum (1) This is the main assembly plant of the MÄhleribau und Industrie A.G» aircraft works of Brunswick. It is situated near the Waggum aerodrome and chiefly assembles planes of the Me. 110. A total of 2,000 workers is reported to be employed in this and in the other two M.I.A.G. Brunswick works, with both of which this plant is connected by rail. A quota of 1J0 F.W. 190 per month is believed to have been allotted to the M.I.A.G. factory in the 1944 programme.
M.I.A.G. Ross Str. (1) Known as the Wilhelmitor works, this is the main components factory of the M.I.A.G. concern and manufactures airframe parts which are then transported to the assembly plant at Waggum,
- 95 -
BRAUNSCHWEIG- (contd. )
M.I.A.G.
Frankfurterstrasse (2)
The Neupetritor works is a second subsidiary company of the M.I.A.G. concern engaged on the manufacture of air-frame components for the assembly plant at Waggum, A large section of this works is still engaged on the production of a variety of general engineering products not connected with the aircraft industry.
Engineering and Armaments
Bttssing-N. At G. Heinrich Büssing Strasse (2)
This factory is situated in the southern quarter of the town and formerly produced cars and motor buses. They are now engaged on the manufacture of components for all types of military transport, artillery, tractors and A.F.V’s. They are reported to employ some 6,000 workers. pantherwerke A. Gt Ludwigstrasse (3) Situated in the northern part of the town, the works of the Pantherwerke A.G. lie approximately a quarter of a mile North west of the Nordbahnhof.
They formerly produced cycles and. perambulators, but now manufacture all types of bicycles and motor cycles for military use.
Schmalbach Frankfurt er strasse (3) The J. A. Schmalbach Blechwarenwerke A. G. are producers of metal plate and of all varieties of containers for use in the canning industry. • In 1936 this firm absorbed the Karger Hammer Maschinenfabrik A.G. of Brunswick,makers of machinery, a firm which also specialised in the requirements of the canning industry. The combined plants of these firms in Brunswick employed some 3 >000 workers before the war.
Brunsviga Maschinenwerke A.G. Kastanien Allee (3) The works of the Brunsviga Maschinenwerke Grimme Natalis & Co.A,G, are situated in the eastern quarter of the town and lie Just West of the Prinz Albrecht Park. They are the leading German producers of all kinds of calculating machines and are probably engaged on the manufacture of small arms components suitable to this type of plant. They normal ly employ several hundred workers.
- 96 -
BRAUNSCHWEIG (contd.)
Wilke Werke A.G. Bahnhofstrasse (2) This firm is chiefly engaged on the production of installations for the oil and gas indus-
’
tries including refining installations, gas­ holders, benzine tanks and various types of boilers. They now employ about 1,000 workers.
Voigtlander & Sohn A.G. Gliesmarode (j)
A
Voigtlander & Sohn A.G» Campestrasse (j) The firm of Voigtlander & Sohn A. Gw is a subsidiary company of the Schering-Kahlbaum concern of Berlin. Their main factory is at Gliesmarode in the North East area of the town. In peace time these works were engaged on the manufacture of cameras and various types of photographic apparatus and appliances. They are now partly engaged on the production of optical instruments, bomb sights and other precision equipment. The premises at Campestrasse in the southern quarter of the town include the administrat­ ive offices, storage depot and a subsidiary factory which also produces photographic apparatus. A total of 1,000 workers was employed in 1939 in the two works.
Signalwerke G.m.b. H. Acker strasse (2) This is a branch factory of the Vereinigte Eisenbahn Signal Werke G.m.b.H. whose parent works are at Bruchsal. The company is owned partly by the Siemens & Halske concern and partly by A.E.G. The Brunswick plant manu­ factures all types of railway signals, and other transport installations. It is believed that at least 1,000 workers were employed at this factory in 1942.
Franke u.Heidedke Salzdahlumerstrasse (j) These works employed some 500 workers in 1939 on the manufacture of photographic apparatus.
Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper
Braunschweiger A.G. Spinner strasse (j) The main factory of the Braunschweiger A.G. fttr Jute u. Flachs-Industrie, is situated in the Northern outskirts of the town and lies on the western bank of the river Oker. It is a jute and flax spinning plant now owned* by the Weidaer Jute-Spinnerei u.Weberei A.G. which also has branch works in Bremen and Hamburg.
--- -o0o— — -
- 97 -
B R E B A C Ht Saar See under Saarbrücken. ------- oOo----- -
BR EM EN
53° 5' N, 8° 50' E: 390 m iles: (383,000) Bremen, the second largest port in Germany, li e s on both banks of the Weser, some JO m iles from the mouth o f the river. It is one of the main terminals o f the transatlantic shipping route.
It has direct r a il communication with B erlin, Hamburg, Hanover, the Ruhr and other parts of Germany. ■ The town i s divided into four d istr ic ts. On the right bank i s the A ltstadt and the Vorstadt. The Neustadt and the Südvor­ stadt are on the le f t bank o f the river. The town area embraces the Suburbs o f Hastedt and Hemelingen, and the Administrative area o f Bremen also extends 12 m iles down the Weser to include the outlying d istr ic ts of Vegesack and Blumenthal. Delmenhorst, which i s in the State of Oldenburg, i s d ealt with separately.
There are three main industrial sections of Bremen, the most important o f which covers the whole o f the dock area on the North East bank o f the river below the old town, starting immediately below the bridge across the Weser and extending to include the important industrial plants on the North West side o f the Handels and Industrie Hafen. In th is d istr ic t are included the important ship yards of Deschimag, engineering and shipping equipment manu­ facturers, aircraft works, s te e l works and an o i l refinery. To the North East o f Bremen there are aircraft fa cto ries and engin­ eering plants while South of the c ity are the aerodrome, an engin­ eering factory and the gas works.
Transportation.
Port Area Bremen (j) The main port area comprises four harbours known as the Werft, Industrie, Handels, and Holz u.
Fabrikenhafen. These li e to the North West o f the city on the right bank of the river. Just North of the Eisenbahn Brücke on the l e f t bank, is the Kleine’Weser, a small tributary o f the main river which gives access to Hohentnrshafan immediately West o f the Neustadter Bahnhof.
There are many small industrial undertakings and storage depots in th is area.
Marshalling Yards Kirchweyhe (j) The ch ief marshalling yards in the Bremen area are on the main lin e to Osnabrück 8 miles from the o ily centre and near to the outlying suburb of Kirchweyhe.
These yards serve the tr a ffic between the Ruhr and North West Germany and the ports of Bremen and Hamburg. They are capable o f handling up to 2,000 wagons per 24 hours.
- 98 -
BREMEN (contd. ) Goods Station Bremen (J) The c h ie f goods s ta tio n in th e Bremen d i s t r i c t is situ a te d West o f the Hauptbahnhof and includes m arshalling yards which handle t r a f f i c fo r the numerous branch lin e s serving the dock area» Goods S tation Bremen (3) A goods s ta tio n and m arshalling yards are situ a te d immediately to the South of the N eustadter Bahnhof on the lin e leading from Delmenhorst to Oldenburg and Wilhelmshaven.
Railway Repair Shops Sebaldsbrück (1) These highly im portant railw ay re p a ir shops are in the South E ast suburb o f Sebaldsbrück.
I t i s believed th a t some 5,000 workers are now employed. In additio n to the maintenance of locom otives and railw ay ro llin g stock, the re p a ir o f heavy lo r r ie s i s also undertaken on a larg e sca le .
P ublic U tility S ervices E le k triz it& ts Werk Hastedt (2) This m unicipal power sta tio n (therm al) has a capacity of 79 MW.
Nordwestdeutsche Kraftwerke A.G.
Werk Untermeser Blumenthal (1) S itu a te d a t Parge in th e o u tly in g d i s t r i c t of Blumenthal, th is therm al power s ta tio n is the la rg e s t o f i t s kind in the area» I t has a capacity o f 200 MW and supplies a considerable portion o f North West Germany.
Kraftwerk 0 sleb shausen ( 3 ) This therm al power p lan t is owned by the Nord­ deutsche H ütte A.G» and has a capacity o f 15 MW.
Gas Werk Neustadt (3) This i s the municipal gas works supplying a large area of Bremen. I t s annual turnover in 1938 was about 1,000 m illio n cubic fe e t o f gas.
Liquid Fuels
O il R efinery Oslebshausen (1) The o il re fin e ry o f the Deutsche Vacuum Oel Co. i s situ a te d in the North suburb o f Oslebshausen.
I t has a capacity o f 100,000 tons per annum and i s sp ec ia lly equipped to produce high-grade
- 99 -
BREMEN (contd, )
lubricating oils from German crude oils and is believed to be working at full capacity* Oil Refinery Honentorshafen (3) The refinery of the Mineralöl - Raffinerie Vorm.
August Korff A.G, is adjacent to the Atlas Werke.
In 1940 some 580 workers were employed on the production of grease and similar heavy lubricants.
Iron and Steel
Norddeutsche Hütte A*G* Oslebshausen (3) These steel works which are owned by the Krupp concern, are located in the northern district of Oslebshausen, The Hüttenabteilung includes a plant of 18O coke ovens and three blast furnaces.
They were reported in 1943 to produce some 400,000 tons of pig iron and 350,000 of coke per annum.
The company has its own power plant mentioned above under Public Utility Services,
Aircraft and Aero Engines
Pocke Wulf G. m.b. H. Airport * " " Hastedt " ” Hemelingen The Focke Wulf Company are believed to have trans­ ferred about two thirds of their Bremen plants to Eastern Germany, East Prussia and Poland, The remaining section on the aerodrome is believed to have been transferred into a depot where 3,000 workers are said to have been employed in 1943 on the modification, repair and maintenance of aircraft. It is believed that the Hastedt and Hemelingen works are now engaged on the production and modification of components for the airport works.
(2)
- 100 -
Weser Flugzeugbau G.m.b.H, a^ Industrie Hafen) (2) b) Lemwerder This company, which is a subsidiary undertaking of the Deschimag concern, has its main plant in the Industrie Hafen» It is engaged on the assembly of Junkers 87 and production of major components for Junkers 87 aircraft. The firm has a subsidiary factory in Delmenhorst which is engaged on the manufacture of components. (See under Delmenhorst,) and both the Industriehafen and Delmenhorst supply the final assembly plant at Lemwerder.
Ship Building Deschimag Bremen (1+) The Deutsche Schiff u. Maschinenbau A.G. is one of the largest ship building concerns in Germany.
It undertakes the construction of all types of naval craft (excluding battleships) and also owns one of the most extensive submarine yards in the Reich. Prior to the outbreak of war large numbers of merchant vessels were also built by Deschimag, but naval construction now has first priority and building of merchant vessels has practically ceased.
The main yards are situated in the area of the Werft and Industrie Hafen, where in 1943 destroyers and "U" boats of the 750 ton type were the main items on the shipbuilding programme. Up to 19 HUM boats have been reported as on the slips, with six fitting out in the basin. Up to 5 destroyers have been reported as under construction and a further 5 as afloat and fitting out. Reports based on aerial reconnaissance indicate that the 10,000 ton cruiser ’Seydlitz* is either being converted to an aircraft carrier or broken up, while a second 10,000 ton cruiser is being scrapped. The Deschimag concern has branch yards at Wesermttnde and Bremerhaven and Bremerhaven and also owns the aircraft works of the Weser Flugzeugbau G.m.b.H. mentioned above.
Bremer Vulkan A. G. Vegesack (1) These are among the most important of the ’*UW boat ship building yards. The 500 ton class of submarine is chiefly built at Vegesack. Reports received during 1942-43 show that at all times at least 14 *U* boats were in various stages of construction in the Vegesack yards, A large cargo ship was laid down in May 1943. The yards have their own foundries and machine shops. More than 4,000 workers were employed here in 1943.
Atlas Werke A.G» Hohentorshafen (2) These ship building yards construct small naval vessels, minesweepers, auxiliary freighters and pontoon ships but they are chiefly important as makers of ships propellers of which they are the leading German manufacturers.
Other products made here include under-water signalling apparatus and auxiliary machinery. Some 2,000 workers were employed at the Atlas yards in 1940. /Engineering
- 101
Engineering and Armaments
C.F. Borgward A. Gw Hastedt (1) H w H Sebaldsbrück (2) The main factory of this well-known firm of German motor manufacturers, is situated in the S.E. suburb of Hastedt. Formerly engaged on the production of three-ton lorries, this plant, where some 8,000 workers were employed in 194-2 was then possibly connected to undertake other types of work including the assembly of torpedoes. In the adjacent district of Sebaldsbrück is a branch factory where in J 942 some 6,000 workers were employed on the production of lorries, A.F.V’s and other types of military transport.
Francke-Werke A.G. Neustadt (3) Situated in the Neustadt district, this company in 194-2 employed some 1,200 workers on the production of machinery and installations for the oil, water and gas industries. One or more of the departments of this plant are reported to be engaged on the machining of shell-bodies and containers for gas.
Kleinschanzlin Grünenstr. (2) The Kleinschanzlin - Bestenbostel G.m.b.H. specialises in the production of high-pressure and other pumps for naval and merchant ships.
Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper
Woll-K&mmerei Blumenthal (2) The Bremer Noll-Kämmerei A. Gw is believed to be the largest wool-conibing plant in Europe. It is situated in the industrial district of Blumenthal on the Weser two miles below Vegesack. The works have their own quays, loading facilities and large storage sheds alongside the river. Several thousand workers were employed here before the war.
Jute Spinnerei a) Nordstr (3) The Bremer Jute Spinnerei A. Gw has branch works which also include the firm’s Head Offices situated in the Nordstr. The main factory is in Delmenhorst.
A total of some 2,400 workers were employed in both plants in 1939.
Food Stuffs
Oelfabriken A.Gw Holzhafen (3) The Bremer-Besigheimer Oelfabriken A.G. , has a large oil crushing plant in the Holzhafen which lies in the N.W. area of Bremen. They were engaged in the crushing of vegetable oils and the plant has an annual capacity of 35,000 tons. Some 400 workers were employed in 1939.
- 102 -
Kaffeehag Holzhafen (-) Kaffee Handels A.G. are well-known manufacturers of caffein-free coffee products, and in peace time had a considerable export trade. They employed about 2,500 workers in 1939.
Roland Mühle Holzhafen (-) The plant of the Bremer Roland Mühle Erling & Co. K.G. consists of a flour mill with a capacity of 300 tons per day; and storage facilities capable of holding 100,000 tons of grain but even pre-war these were only utilised to the extent of about 10 per cent.
Gereke & Deppen Holzhafen (-) The Gereke & Deppen Hansa Mühle A.G. is a subsidiary of the Roland Mühle Erling Company. The flour mill has a capacity of 200 tons per day and the grain silo storage capacity of 80,000 tons.
Gebrüder Nielsen G»m.b.H.* Hohentorhafen (-) These rice and starch mills are adjacent to the Atlas Werke. They are reported to have a storage capacity of 2,500 tons.
Bremer Lagerhausgesellschaft Hafen III (-) This company owns a number of large general warehouses and storage depots in various parts of the port area and employed a total of some 1,500 workers before the. war. Their grain silos in the Hafen III area have a capacity of 80,000 tons. —— —oOo———
- 103 -
BREMERHAVEN ( Hanover )
53° 33’ N. 8° 35* E: 395 miles (79,000) Bremerhaven lies on the right bank of the Weser some 30 miles North of Bremen, In 1924 the former suburbs of Lehe, Geestemünde and Wülsdorf were united to form the district of Wesermünde, now incorporated in the town of Bremerhaven. The port has direct railway communication with Cuxhaven and Hamburg, In peace-time Bremerhaven is primarily concerned with the Transatlantic passenger service, and the passengers of the Nord Deutsche Lloyd and other Bremen shipping lines, embarked and disembarked at this port. There is an extensive dock system capable of accomodating the largest liners, and shipbuilding yards which have greatly increased in importance during the war.
Bremerhaven is also a centre for the fishing industry, and has separate docks specially devoted to the handling of fish, for which it is the largest despatching station in Germany.
Transpor tat ion Bremerhaven (3)
Port Area „
The main docks are situated in the Northern quarter of the town in Bremerhaven proper.
They include the Kaiserhftfen I,II and III, which are at that end of the town nearest to the mouth of the Weser. They can accomodate the largest ocean-going liners. The Alter Hafen and the Neuer Hafen are two smaller docks situated parallel with the banks of the river. Further upstream and beyond the mouth of the river Geeste,a tributary of the Weser, is the Hohentorshafen. The two fishing harbours in Wesermünde include Germany’s largest fish despatch station.
Marshalling Yards Lederheide (3) These railway marshalling yards are situated in the Northern suburb of Lederheide. They serve the town and port areas and the branch lines to Cuxhaven and Hamburg.
Shipbuilding
Deschimag Bremerhaven (1) The Deutsche Schiff und Maschinebau A.G. , whose main works are at Bremen, have two important yards at Bremerhaven. The first, known as the Hauptwerk Geestemünde, includes two fitting out docks, machine factory, assembly shops, foundries and welding plants.
The Werk Bremerhaven has three dock basins, repair workshops, and slipways capable of accomodating 6 U-boats of the 750 ton class. During 1942 these yards were working to capacity with 2 U-boats fitting out in the basin and 6 under construction on the slips. Naval craft and pontoons are also built at these yards.
/Uhterweser
-104-
Unterweser A.G. Bremerhaven (2) The Schiffsbau Gesellschaft Unterweser A.G. constructs escort vessels and minesweepers.
Their yards include dry docks, machine shops, and eight slips each able to accommodate vessels up to JOO ’ in length. They are believed to be turning out 200’ escort vessels at the rate of one every two months. Several thousand workers are employed.
Norddeutsche Werft Bremerhaven (j) Some 800 yards from Its mouth, the River Geeste forms a sharp ”S” bend’, on the right side of which are shipyards believed to belong to the Norddeutsche Werft. They are reported to undertake the construction of escort vessels and minesweepers.
Teckleriborg Bremerhaven (-) The former shipyards of Tecklenborg & Co. were taken over by the German Government at the beginning of the war, and are now being used as a base for training naval personnel in the handling of., warship machinery.
Food Stuffs
Nordsee A.G. Wesermttnde (-) The extensive fish depots of the Nordsee A.G. are built round the Wesermhnde fishing harbours.
This compary owns a large fleet of trawlers and is Germains largest fishing concern. She preparation and despatch of fish is undertaken in the Wesermhnde depots and in peace time the Company had a considerable export trade. There are similar depots belonging to this concern in Hamburg and Cuxhaven and a total of 6,500 workers were employed in 1939*
0O0—
-105- .
B R E S L A U (S ilesia ) 51° 5* N. 17° E: 7¥> miles: (625,000) Breslau i s the ch ief c ity o f S ile s ia . I t l i e s on the river Oder and is on one o f the- stain routes to Poland and the eastern front. The c ity i s in two unequal halves divided by the Oder which flows through Breslau in several channels over which are numerous bridges. The larger portion, on the l e f t bank, includes the old part of the town.
Breslau is the ch ief industrial centre o f eastern Germany and is important owing to it s position near the S ile s ia n coal and ore fie ld s. Among i t s industries are engineering woiks including the largest railway wagon manufacturers in the Reich, non-ferrous metal plants dealing ch iefly with aluminium, a ircra ft works te x tile factories, and iron foundries. There are also in th is d is tr ic t numerous small chemical factories^ grain s ilo s and flou r m ills.
In order to fa c ilita te transportation o f coal from S ile sia to S tettin and other parts of Germany, a canal known as the Breiterbachfahrt canal has been b u ilt which, in conjunction with the A lte Oder, by-passes the northern outskirts of the c ity and joins the Oder some two miles to the N.W.
Transportation
Marshalling Yards Breslau- (1) Bockau
The ch ief marshalling yards and goods station l i e to the S.E. o f the main railway station . They can handle up to 5,000 wagons per 24 hours. Included in th is area are railway workshops employing some 1,200 workers on the repair arid maintenance of goods wagons and locomotives.
Railway Repair Shops Breslau (2) Further important workshops are situated near the gas works which l i e just south of the A lte Oder.
They employ some 2,000 workers on the repair and maintenance of goods wagons and locomotives.
Public U tility Services
Städtisches Elektrizitätswerk * Scheibenweg (2)
1
. This thermal power plant supplies the c ity area
4
and has a capacity of 48 MW.
Tsohechnitz Kraftbarn (2) Also known as the Kraftwerk Kraftborn, th is thermal power plant has a capacity of 89 MW and belongs to the ESAG network.
Gas-Werke »
These works, owned by the A.G. für Gas und E lek trizitä t, ire o f lo ca l importance only.
/Non-Ferrous
-106-
Nort-Ferrous M etal M anufacture and F a b ric a tio n E.F. Ohle’ s Erben A,Ge A nderssenstr. (3) T his firm is re p o rte d to employ some }80 w orkers on the p roduction of aluminium, t i n f o i l , and s im ila r goods.
-107-
E^ESIAU (contd.)
Bertram« A .G. . ' Mark! sehe strasse (3) Bertrams A.G. have their main works in Siegen with branch factories in Berlin and Breslau* The Breslau plant employs some 400 workers and specialises in the manufacture of tube furnaces* Metallhuttenwerke Schaeffer Hennigstrasse (j) The MetallhEttenwerke Schaeffer & Schael A.G. are manufacturers of bronze bearings for locomotives and other copper and bronze products. They employ some 800 workers and also own the Hydrometer A.G. of Breslau.
Metallhuttenwerke Hoffmann Striegauerstrasse (j)
The Metallhffttenwerk Dr.Hoffmann and Go. employ some 400 workers on the manufacture of metals for printing types, lead tin alloys and similar kinds of non-ferrous metal products.
Metallhuttenwerk Kirchhof Ofenstrasse (3) The MetallhSttenwerk Kirchhof and Kbhnel employed some 450 workers in 1939« They are engaged on the production of aluminium alloys and silicium copper.
Metallhuttenwerk Pinhoff Ofenstrasse (3) The M.G.Pinhoff Metal plant is adjacent to the Kirchhof and Kohnel works. It has been reported that several hundred workers were employed here in 1939 on the production of phosphor, and silicium copper. Reports suggest that in 1943 the works laboratories were experimenting.
Aircraft and Aero Engines Schlesische Reparaturwerft Breslau (3) These workshops are engaged on the repair and maintenance of aero-engines and aircraft wings.
Junkers Gandau (2) The Jungers Flugzeug und Motorenbau A.G. have an important factory on the Gandau aerodrome in the North West outskirts of Breslau. These works are believed to undertake the complete assembly of aircraft and at least 5,000 workers are employed.
-108-
BRESIAU (contd.)
Linke Hoffmann Breslau (3) This works includes at least one department devoting its entire capacity to the manufacture of a/c components and probably also to the production and/or repair of a/c fuselages.
Ship Building
Breslauer Schiffsbau An der Viehweide (3) The Breslauer Schiffsbaugesellschaft G.m.b.H, normally specialises in the building and repair of barges and tug boats but may now be con­ structing T.L.C. and other military craft suitable to this type of yard.
C.Y/olheim’sche Werft u.Hafenanlage Cosel (3) These small yards normally build barges, tug boats, and small river craft.
Engineering and Armaments
Max Jansch F. & W. Schubert
Lange Gasse Frankfurterstrasse (3)
These two companies employed some 400 workers each iit 1939 on the manufacture of lorry trailers.
"Famo”
Breslau (1)
The "Famo" Fahrzeug und Motorenwerke G.nub.H. formerly known as the Maschinenwerke Linke Hoffmann is situated in the southern part of the town between the main Linke-Hoffmann plant and the Freiburger Bahnhof. These works are reported to employ some 5,000 workers and manu­ facture all the M.A.N. type submarine Diesel and tank engines. They may also be producing artill­ ery, tractors, lorries and other types of military transport. It is believed that at least one department of this works is now engaged on the building of aero-engines.
Archimedes A.G., Märkische strasse (3) The Archimedes Schlesische-S&chsische Schrauben Fabriken A.G. is owned by the Linke Hoffmann concern and is situated between their main factory and the HFamoM plant. It employs some 1,300 workers and is engaged on the manufacture of machine* tools, screws, nuts,bolts and-, machine components.
-109-
BRESIAU (contd.)
Linke Hoffmann A.G. Grundstrasse (1) u H n Nikolai torstrasse (2j The Linke Hoffmann concern are the largest producers of« railway wagons in Germany and have two plants at Breslau. The main works are situated south of the MIrkisehestrasse and adjacent to the Archimedes plant. They employ some 15,000 workers on the manufacture of 20-ton railway trucks of which they are reported to produce up to 10,000 per annum. The works and foundries have recently been considerably extended.
To idle North of the main works and West of the Nikolaitorstrasse is a subsidiary company of Linke-Hoffmann undertaking which probably manu­ factures tank engines, motor vehicles, components for mobile repair shops, tractors, and dredgers.
They are reported to employ some 2,500 workers.
Rheinmetall Bor sig A.G. Handsfeld (j) The parent works of this company are in Dussel­ dorf. The Breslau plant is situated at Hundsfeld in the northern outskirts of the town and reports suggest that some 1,500 workers are employed on the manufacture of light metal products for armaments, including bomb components and fuses.
Oren stein & Koppel A.G. Schmiedefeld (5) In the western suburb of Schmiedefeld are the former storage depots and repair workshops of Orenstein and Koppel A.G. These are now reported to employ some 1,000 workers on the manufacture of A.F.V*s and other types of militaiy transport.
Deubag G.M.B.H. Tauentzienstrasse (-) This company employs some JOO workers on the production of lorry trailers, cranes, bombs and lifts.
Schmoschever & Co. Kaiser Wilhelm Strasse (5) The Gesellschaft fur Feldbahnindustrie Schmoschever & Co. is situated south west of the Hauptbahnhof.
It manufactures steam and diesel small-gauge loco­ motives, trucks and road building machines.
Hydrometer A.G. Siebenhufenstrasse (3) This company is owned-by the Metallhüttenwerk Schaefer & Schael A.G. and employs some 550 workers on the manufacture of speedometers, water \
and oil meters and special measuring instruments for the chemical industiy.
-110-
BRESUU (contd.) J.Kemma Grabschenerstrasse (3; The works of the J.Kemma Eisengiesserei und Maschinenfabrik, employ some 1,400 workers on the manufacture of road building and agric­ u ltu ra l machines* H.Meinecke A.G. Karlowitz (-) Situated in the northern suburb of Karlowitz th is firm enploys some 400 workers on the manufacture of water and e le c tric meters of a l l types.
Chemicals and Explosives H.Bergius & Co. Goldschmieden (3) The Chemische Fabrik Bergius Ä Co. i s situated in the western suburb .of Goldschmieden and p rio r to the war manufactured aluminium oxide and sulphuric acid.
Superphosphatwerk a^d.Guntherbmcke (-) The Georg von Giesche ’s Erben plant specialises in the manufacture of superphosphate.
V ereinigte Holzindustrie A.G. Kaiser Wilhelm Strasse (-) This firm has i t s parent works in Gleiwitz.
The Breslau branch is a wood d is tilla tio n p la n t.
S trahl & Walter K.G. Karlowitz (-) Situated in the northern ou tsk irts of Breslau th is factory manufactures n itro-cellulose varnishes, p ain ts and glue.
F.R eichelt A.G. Gartenstrasse (3) Some 700 workers are employed on the manufacture of drugs, and parmaceutical products.
T sytiles, Rayon, Blip and Paper Glanzstoff A.G. Friedewalde (3) Situated in the North East suburb of Friedewalde is a branch factory of the Vereinigte Glanzstoffabriken A.G. of E lberfeld. Known as the V/erk Cavallen i t manufactures viscose rayon and is reported to have a daily capacity of 10 tons. The plant employed some 1,250 workers in 1939*
-111-
BRESIAU (contd.) Kammgarnspinnerei . Stabeiwitz (3) The wool spinning plant of the StabeIwitzer Kammgarnspinnerei is situated in the outlying suburb of Stabelwitz three miles to the North • , West of Breslau. Some 1,500 workers were employed on the manufacture of worsted goods in 1939.
Food Stuffs * GrosseMuhle A.G. Nikolai Stadtgraben (-) The main works of the Grosse Muhle Oels A.G-. are situated in Oels in Silesia. The Breslau branch consists of a grain storage depot and-flour mill. .
Rosenthaler Muhlenwerke A.G-. Rosenthal (-) This company owns a large flour mill and storage plant in Breslau. The storage plant has a capacity of 240,000 tons and the mill had a daily output of 200 tons in 1939* Schlesische Mlhlenwerke A.G-. Burgweide (-) Situated in the northern suburb of Burgweide ' is a flour mill which is reported to have a daily output of 100 tons in 1939.
Schottwitz A.G-. Burgweide (-) The Zuckerfabrik Schottwitz A.G. at Burgweide is the principal sugar refinery in the Breslau s area.
Stadt. Hafen & Lagerhaus Mahlstrasse (—) This is a grain silo and food storage plant. "
The storage plant is reported to have a capacity of some 60,000 tons.
Ernst Barke Muhlstrasse (-) This grain silo has a storage capacity of 30,000 tons.
— — o0o— — -
B R I E S T E (Brandenburg) See under Senftenberg. — — .-oOo-— —
-112-
B R U C H S A L (Baden) 49° 5 ’ N. 8° 35’ E: 420 nd les: (17,000) Bruchsal i s on the railway lin e from Karlsruhe to Heidelberg.
The town i s an important junction, but i s ch iefly noteworthy as the home of one of the larg est German sighal mariufactdrers. I ts only other industries are a number Of small engineering firms and paper works. ' ' .
Transportation
Railway Junction Bruchsal (3) Bruchsal is a junction fo r the important la te ra l route through the Black Forest to S tu ttg art and Heilbronn. A few miles north of the town a branch railway Connects with the main Karlsruhe-Mannheim lin e.
Engineering and Armaments Signalwerke Bruchsal (2) The Vereinigte Eisenbahn Signalwerke G.m.b.H. one of Germany’s larg est producers of railway signals, have th e ir main factory a t Bruchsal and a branch works in Brunswick. The company is owed partly by the Siemens & Halske concern, and p artly by A.E.G. I t manufactures a ll types of railway signals, e le c tric a l railway equipment and numerous other transport in sta lla tio n s. -™~o0o——-
. v - B RU H L (Rhineland) ?•, '■" ■ 50° 50’ N. 6° 55’ E: , J10 miles: (24,000) The small town of Brühl .lies on a branch railway some 10 miles North west of Bonn. The town’s Chief .a c tiv itie s are connected with the exploitation of the brown coal deposits in th is neigh-, bourhood. Apart from these there is a metal works, which is mentioned below, and a few minor engineering concerns.
Public U tility Services Kraftwerk < > Bruhl (2) . Adjacent to the Roddergrube brown coal mine is* a large, thermal power sta tio n which has a.capacity of 92 W . A
-113-
BRUHL (Contd) Soli^ Fuels Briquette Works Brühl (3) There are a number of these works excavating and briquetting the brown coal in the neigh­ bourhood of Brühl. The p rin cip al p its are owned by the Braunkohlen & B rikett Rodegrube A.G. and the company has i ts own power p lan t, mentioned above under Public U tilities» Iron and S teel Pohlig A.G. (?) This i s a branch factory of the Pohlig works at Cologne. They are constructors of cables, railways and transport in s ta lla tio n s .
B R U N S W IC K
See under Braunschweig. .pOo »—»■■■■ /
B U E R / R U H R
See under Gelsenkirchen. ———0O0— —-
B U N Z L A U (S ilesia) 51° 15* H. 15°35, E: 680 miles (21,000) Bunzlau is in Lower S ilesia on the main lin e from Dresden to Breslau, 30 miles west of Liegnitz« There are a few indust­ r ie s , including engineering and bookbinding and pressing works, but none is important.
B U R B AC H» Saar See under Saarbrücken.
B U R G (Province Saxony) 52° 15« H. 11° 50« Es 515 miles: (25,000) Burg is situated approximately 15 miles North East of Magdeburg on the main railway to B erlin. The town’s a c tiv itie s include glass manufacturers, furniture makers, and machine fa c to rie s. These are a l l on a small scale.
-1 1 4 -
B U R G H A U S E N (Bavaria) 4ß° 10» N. 12° 50* E: 620 miles: (6,300) Burghausen is a small town in Upper Bavaria, 60 miles East of Munich and close to the former Austrian border. I t is on a branch line from Mtthldorf, 15 miles to-the West of Burghausen. The town’s importance is due to the branch factory of the large chemical firm of Wacker, mentioned below. There are no other industries*
Chemicals and Explosives Wacker G.m.b.H. Burghausen (1) The- important chemical firm of Dr .Alexander Wacker G.m.b.H., of Munich, have th e ir main works in Burghausen. This firm produces calcium carbide, chlorinated hydro-carbons.
Other chemicals manufactured here include butyl alcohol, phosgene, synthetic sh ellac, ethyl alcohol, chlorine, chloroform, ethyl and methyl acetate, acetone, acitic-anhydride, acetylene, and acetate of c ellu lo se. P rio r to the war Wacker was believed to be the sole . producer of some Of these products. ——-oOo— —
B U R G S T A D T (Saxony) 50° 55' N. 12° 50' Es 560 miles: (18,000) Burgstadt lie s on the railway from Chemnitz to Leipzig, some 10 miles North of Chemnitz. The town’s p rin cip al facto ries are chiefly connected with the clothing industry, p a rtic u la rly the manufacture, of gloves and stockings. None of these firms are individually of importance.
oO O———
B U R S C H E I D (Rhineland)
Engineering and Armaments Goetzwerke Burscheid (3) The firm of Goetzwerke, Friedrich Goetze A.G. a t Burscheid employ 1,000 workers on the manu­ facture of components fo r in tern al combustion engines, p a rtic u la rly p isto n rin g s.
— ---- 0O0------
-115-
PASSEL (see under KASSEL)
< : ; CASTROP-RAUXEL (Westphalia) 51° 35’N. 7° 20*E: 320 miles: (58,000) The area here covered is the administrative district of Castrop- Rauxel, and forms an inverted triangle the base of which is the Emscher Canal from Victor Hafen to the aqueduct of Henricheriburg, and whose apex is roughly at Merklinde» Rauxel contains an important synthetic oil and synthetic ammonia plant and also two important tar distillation plants; photographic interpretation shows that one of these is only “possibly active“.
Transportation
Rhein-Herne Canal . < N. of Castrop-Rauxel A stretch’of 3? miles of the Rhein-Herne Canal is included in the North of Castrop-Rauxel area extending from Friedrich der Grosse harbour to Henriche riburg. Previously called the “Zweig Canal”, this stretch is now known as part of the Rhein-Herne canal. The Victor concern has a private harbour just North of the industrial complex.
Aqueduct Henricheriburg (3) This aqueduct is situated 3 North of Castrop station, and is about J nu South West of the : autobahn bridge over the canal, it carries the Rhein-Herne canal over the Emscher Canal;
Public Utility Services
Gew. Victor power station Rauxel (3) The power station is situated to the North East of the Victor complex, 1| m. North East of • Rauxel station. It is of the thermal type, hard coal fired, and is believed to have a. capacity of 40 MW.
Solid Fuels
Victor Oollieiy Rauxel r The colliery is situated m. North East of Rauxel station and lies to the North of the Victor complex,, it is owned by Klöckner Werke A. G., and includes the Ickern Colliery.
The output of hard coal in 1937 amounted to 2,186,000 tons.
Victor 3/4 Coking plant Rauxel (3) The coking plant lies immediately south of the colliery sidings. Conveyors lead from the colliery to the ovens. There are 250 ovens in 5 batteries having an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 1,269,000 tons.
A by-products plant adjoins the coke ovens to the South. (See under “Public
-116-
Utilities” for details of the power station , under "Liquid Fuels" for synthetic oil, and under "Chemicals" for the synthetic ammonia plant«)
Erin coking plant Castrop (3) Situated at the Erin colliery, nu South of Castrop station, the plant is owned by the Gelsenkirchener Bergwerks A.G. There are J, , ; 120 ovens with an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 885,000 tons. Cas is supplied , to the Ruhr gas grid.
Erin l/$ colliery , Castrop (j) Located^ m. South of Castrop station and ' owned by Gelsenkirchener Bergwerks A. G. the output of the colliery in 1937 was 1,058,000 tons of hard coal per annum. The colliery and coking plant is reported to employ about 1,600 workers.
Graf Schwerin coking plant ' Castrop (3)
B
The plant is owned by Bergbau A.G. Lothringen and is situated Lgr m. South West of Castrop station at Westhofen. There are 150 coke .. ovens with an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 350,000 tons.
Liquid Fuels
Gew. Victor synthetic oil plant Rauxel (2) Owned by Klöckner Wintershall A.G. the Fischer-Tropsoh plant occupies the South East quadrant of the Victor complex, 1^ m. North East of Rauxel station. The plant covers an area of 18 acres. Capacity is estimated at 100,000 tons of oil per annum. Storage capacity if reported to be just over 22,000 tons.
Teerverwertung Rauxel (2) This tar distillation plant is Located -g- m.
North of Rauxel station, North of the railway line to Victor Hafen on the Zweig Canal. It is owned by Gesellschaft fttr Teervertwertung m.b.H, and produces the complete range of tar products. The capacity is estimated at 500,000 tons per annum.
Rtitgerswerke A.G. Rauxel (3) The tar distillation plant is situated adjoining Rauxel station to the North but South of the* railway line to Victor Hafen.
All tar products are made. Capacity is estimated at 200,000 tons per annum.
According to photographic interpretation the plant was only "possibly active" in 1943*
-117-
Chemicals and Explosives Gew. Victor Rauxel (3) The synthetic ammonia plant is owned by Gewerkschaft V ictor S tickstoff und Benzinwerk and is located 3^ m. North East of Rauxel sta tio n in the South East section of the Victor complex. The adjacent coke ovens (see under "Solid Fuels”) supply hydrogen for the Claude ammonia synthesis.
Capacity is reported to exceed 25,000 metric tons of nitrogen per annum. The plant also" makes n itric acid and is probably the world’ s larg e st producer of potassium n itra te . (V ictor synthetic o il plant is under "Liquid Fuels", and the power sta tio n under "Public U tilitie s " )
CELLE (Hanover) 52 35’N. 10 5‘B. 440 miles. (28,000> Several of the firms exploiting the o il deposits in the Province of Hanover have th e ir offices in C elle. A b iscu it factory and several small hardware manufacturers are the only in d u strial plants.
The town is a centre fo r the marketing of a g ricu ltu ral produce.
oOo—----
118 —
0 H B M W I T Z (Saxogf)
50° 50* K. 12° 55’ B: 570 «Ile», (370,000) Chemnits ranks third amongst the cities of Saxony and is the centre of Germany’s hosiery and underwear manufacture» There are a large number of light engineering works which in peace time specialised in the manufacture of textile machinery. There are some inportant makers of machine to d s and Chemnits has also a large output of motor sidecars and bicycles. The town is not on one of the main German through routes but is an important centre for the railway system of the highly industrialised Province of Saxony. The railway repair shops among the largest in Germany. To the West of Chsmnits is the adjoining town Siegmar - Schönau which, although a separate municipality, has been included in Chenmits for the purposes of the list below.
TraMportatlon
Goods Station Kappel ) ( (3)
* • Utendorf ) » • • Sonnenberg ) ( (3)
w w Ghemnits - Sttd) These four goods yards, of which Kappel and Sonnenberg (next to the main railway station) are the largest, have extensive storage facilities.
Sailway Repair Shops Hilbersdorf (2) These highly important repair shops are believed to enploy approximately 6,000 workers. They include a marshalling yard with a pre-war capacity of 5,500 wagons per 2A hours.
Public Utility Services
Electric power Station Nordstr. (2) This Is a steam power station with a capacity of 74 Ißf» It is Mtuated in the northern quarter of the town dose to the Schloss Teich, a large ornamental lake in the middle of the town.
Gas Works Chemnits-Nord (2) In 1958 these gas works sold 1,200 million cubic feet of gas.
Engineering and Aymamants
Anto Union Siegmar (2) These premises are the important qar manufacturing plant of the Wanderer Werke and are leased to the Auto Union.
119-
CHEMNITZ (contd).
The works have a large capacity and. have been reported to be making six-sealer Kübelwagen, searchlight chassis and other types of military- transport. One portion of this factop- con^lex is still retained by the Wanderer Werke and is engaged on the production of machine topis ' including milling and cutting machinery. ,,<r. . < C c Auto Union ’ *./** <3) This factory produces electrical equipment / * for motor transport including batteries and • ■ -.h searchlights. ;• /" ' \ •• -c-; •? Auto Union *'■ v;'\ , Rosempyerstr. (3) These premises, which were formerly known as the Prestowerke, were converted into central administration, spare parts stores and repair shops in 1938. According to ground , reports they are still used for this purpose.
Auto Union Neukirchenerstr. (3) This is a further subsidiary factory of the Auto Union concern.
Wanderer Werke Schönau (2) These works were afcorig the^leading German makers of typewriters, adding and calculating machines । and other office machinery. They Are now believed to be engaged on the manufacture of small arms, armaments oomponAhts and a Variety of other engineering products of military importance. \ ‘ , Reineoker Bernhardstr. (1) The firm of J. E. Reineoker A. & is one of the most, inportant of all German machine- tool makers. The factory is situated in the suburb of Gablenz in the eastern part of the built-up area and in ,1938 there were already over 3,000 workers. The products are milling and gear cutting machines, lathes of ail kinds, and a wide variety of precision machine tools and measuring instruments. '
Deutsche Niles A.G. Siegmar (3) These works formerly belonged to the firm : of Hermann Alfred Escher A. Gk They f t i ~ v L • ’ manufacture lathes and horizontal borers and a variety of other machine tools. : A Union. 7 ' < \ Zwickauerstr. (3) The Werkzeugmasohinenfabrik Union (vormals Diehl) is owned by Karl Wetzel ’s Maschinen­ fabrik of Gera and specialises in horizontal and other types of boring machinery.
120
CHEMNITZ (contd).
Bernhard Escher
Wettinerstr. (J)
The Sächsische Werkte; jaiasohinen Fabrik Bernhard Escher A. G. are specialists in lathes.
Neudel
Nordstr. (3)
C. Hermann Neudel is a firm making lorry and motor car springs.
Pfauter
Einsiedlerstr. (3)
Hermann Pfauter is a maker of gear- cutting machines.
Sächsische Maschinenfabrik Chemnitz This firm is one of Germany’s principal manufacturers of conveyors and mechanical grate stokers.
C. Herm. Fipdeisen Chemnitz (3) Manufacturing goods and passenger lifts, ‘overhead travelling and locomotive cranes, this firm is one of Germany’s principal lift and hoist builders.
Nostitz u. Koch Chemnitz Zwickauerstr. (3) Manufactures transformers and switchgear.
Gesellschaft fur Junkers Dieselkraft Altchemnitzerstn (3) Maschinen m.b. H.
This is one of the principal German manufacturers of special type of opposed piston engines.
Hartmann-Lufthamnerbau, Anton Halse. Dresdner Str. (3) Manufacturers of hydraulic forging presses and ancillary equipment. In particular this firm also makes small pneumatic drop hammers.
H.F. Schnieke Johannisstr. (3) This firm are important small-tool manufacturers, specialising in milling cutters, reamers, and threshing tools.
Bachmann & Ladewig A.G. Strassburger str. (3) This, company are important manufacturers of wood-working machines.
121
Maschinenfabrik Germania Pabrikstr. (3) (vorm. J.S. Schwalbe u Sohn) This conpany is among the leading German maker a of hydraulic turbines. It also makes steam engines, mechanical stokers,' refrigerators, and a range of other mechanical engineering products.
Carl Hamel A.G. Schönau (3) These works employed approximately 1,000 hands in 1938 and were important makers of textile machinery. No information is available as to the firms’ present range of products.
C.G. Hauboia A.&. Uhliohstr. (3) Before the war this firm were makers of textile machinery including dyeing and printing machines.
Schubert & Salzer Lothringerstr. (2) These important makers of textile machinery employed some 3,000 workers in 1939. They are now reported to be fully engaged on the manufacture of small arms and several light engineering products.
Viscosa G»m.b. H. Kauffahrtei ) C.H. Weisbaoh Dorf str. ) Before the war these two finis were makers of all types of textile finishing machinery.
Richard Hartmann Altohemnitzer- (2) str.
The Sächsische Textilmaschinenfabrik Richard Hartmann A.G> increased in size during the years preceding the war and in 1939 enployed some 2,000 workers. The 4 company has a second factory in Chemnitz (Hartmannstr. ). Pre-war products were all kinds of spinning machinery. Reports suggest that the firm has been completely converted and now makes machine tools.
Elitewerke Siegmar (3) The Elite Diamanten Werke A.G» are owned by Opel's and are makers of bicycles and textile, particularly knitting, machinery.
They expanded considerably during the years 193$ to 1939» The firm's war time products are not known.
122
Kappel A.G. Zwiokauerstr. (3) The Maschinenfabrik Kappel A.G. normally makes typewriters but it is reported that the works have now been turned over chiefly to bicycles for army use,automatic gun parts, and A. A. shells* They now employ 1200 workers, mostly women, which is more than double the number employed in 1939.
. Rother & Kunze A.G* Schlossstr. (j) In peace time this company makes furniture and has a second factory in Zeulenroda* It is now reported to be producing precision instruments, cartridges, and shells, and to employ some 900 workers.
Schönherr Fischweg (J) The Sächsische Webstuhlfabrik (Louis Schönherr) specialise in weaving machinery and associated appliances.
The firm*s war time products are not known.
G* Krautheim’A.G. Wörths tr. (J) This firm of aluminium casters is reported to be now employing several thousand workers, in three shifts, making incendiary bomb casings on a large-scale. Confirmation of this report is lacking.
Alex Drechsler Rosenstr. ) ( (-)
Th. Prippenow Bemhardstr. ) These two firms are aluminium casters and makers of aluminium goods.
Astrawerke • Altchemnitzer- (3) str.
This firm which normally makes adding and calculating machines increased its workers from 650 in 1936 to 1,750 in 1939. It is presumably engaged on armament work suitable for this type of plant.
David Richter A.G. Annabergerstr. (-) This firm is believed to make textile x machinery and machine tools* Emil Dieterle Clausstr. (-) This firm specialises in band saws and band steel*
125
CHEMNITZ (contd. )
Biematzkl & Co. Zschopauerstr. (3)
This firm manufactures milling and cutting machines. Prior to the war about 400 workers were employed.
Bernhard GlMss Turnstr. (-)
Makers of lathes and machine tools.
Gebr. Langer Liribacherstr. (3)
These works specialise in screws, springs, and precision tools and are reported to eo^loy 1,000 workers.
Paradit Bernsdorferstr. (-)
The Faradit Rohr & Walzwerk A.G. makes tubes and parts for electrical installations.
Schmirgel Rottluff (3) (Weideweg)
a
The Schmirgel and Corundewerke Chemnitz A.G. makes aluminium oxide and silicon carbide for grinding wheels.
Chemicals and Explosives H. Th. Böhme A. G. Neefestr. (3)
The factory belonging to this company is known as the Böhme Fett Chemie G. nub.H. and manufactures pharma­ ceutical and other chemical products.
Textiles, Rayon Pulp and Paper William Janssen A. G. Sohlossstr. ) Mafrasa A. G. Lothringerstr. ( (“ Mafrasa A.G. Alfredstr.
The above are three of the large number of hosiery manufacturers in Chemnitz.
Rudolf Kinder Limbacherstr. ) Anton Kurt Gabel sberger st Fuchss & Co. Theaterstr. ) Hermann Hoffmann Dresner str. )
The above are spinners and cotton doublers and are a selection from the large number of similar firms in Chemnitz.
C. F. Solbirg A.G. Dorf str. ) Josef Witt Schulstr. ) The above films are worsted spinners. ----- o0o-----
1 ZU-
Clausthal (j)
CLADSTHAL ZEIL/JJ&'KI-D (Hanover) 5 1 ° « ' N. 10° 20« E. 450 m. 11,000 Clausthal is a small town in the Harz district of the Province of Hanover, 30 m. South of Brunswick. It has a number of small firms engaged in the mining and fabricating of lead, the most inportant of which is given below.
Non-Ferrous Metals Oberhauzer Berg- u.
Hüttenwerke (Preussag) Owned by the Preussische Bergwerks- u. Hutten A.G-., this firm has an annual capacity of 15,000 metric tons of crude lead and 15,000 metric tons of refined lead.
----0O0— -—
COBLENZ (see KOBLENZ) — . „ 0 O 0 — — —
COBURG (Bavaria) 50° 15’ N. 11° Es 490 miles: (29,500) Formerly the capital of a minor principality Coburg’s industries are on a small scale comprising textiles, biscuit making and porcelain.
Only the railway repair shops are worth noting.
Transportation
Railway Repair Shops Coburg (3) These medium-sized repair shops are mainly engaged on the repair of goods wagons.
COLOGNE (see KOIfl)
-0O0-
COSEL (see KOSEL)
COSWIG (Anhalt) 51° 55’ N. 12° 30« E: 540 miles: (13,000) Coswig is a small industrial town on the northern bank of the Elbe halfway between Dessau and Y/ittemberg. (This is not to be confused with Coswig in Saxony). There is a small inland harbour, some manufacture of matches and of paper and, in addition to the firm mentioned below, two chemical factories of lesser importance.
Chemicals and Explosives Sprengstoff A.G. Coswig (3) The Westfalisch Anhaitische Sprengstoff A.G. are makers of nitro-cellulose powder and mining explosives. The works has been reported to have a small sulphuric acid plant.
125
COSTTIG- (Saxony)
51° 10« N. 1J° 30’ Es 595 ndles: (9,500) This small industrial town lies on the N. bank of the Elbe halfway between Dresden and Meissen (it is not to be confused with Coswig in Anhalt). In addition to the in^ortant engineering works mentioned below there are a number of similar engineering firms.
Epftineerii^ and Armaments
Kir chbach* sehe Coswig (2)
The Kirchbach’ sehe Werke A.G. specialise in the making of brake linings, clutches and propellor shafts, and are reported to supply a large proportion of Germany’s requirements of these products.
Leather
Kotitzer Ledertuch A.G« Coswig (-)
This firm specialises in oil cloth, leather d o t h and leather for tippers. It is a factory of some importance in this branch.
COTTBUS (Brandenburg)
.51° 45« N. 14° 20« E: 620 ndless (55/00)
This is a very important railway junction and, next to Berlin, the most important junction on the routes from W. and Central Germany to the Eastern frontiers, six main lines come together near the centre of the town. There are large marshal 1 i ng yards and an important railway repair shop. There are a number of cloth factories, not one of which is of outstanding size but which together made this town a valuable part of the German textile industry prior to the war.
There are also a number of manufacturers of carpet ani sail cloth.
A more recent development is the erection here of a large aircraft works of Focke-AVulf •
<
■
Transportation
Railway Centres Cottbus (2) In the S.W. quarter of the town and immediately to the w. of the main railway stätion, there is a junction of four main lines approaching Cottbus from the and S., large marshal ling yards and goods yards and adjacent as also are the extensive railway repair ships. To the E. of the town is another railway junction where the lines diverge to Frarikfort/Oder, Posen, ani Bresi n
Gustav Knackstebt Cottbus (3) This firm makes railway switch gear, signals and other railway accessories.
126
COTTBUS (Brandenburg) (Contd) Aircraft and Aeroengines Focke Wulf Cottbus This large aircraft works was constructed after the bombing of the firm’s parent works at Bremen. The Cottbus factory has been engaged on erection and assembly of BW-2OO and possibly also components for the W-4 90 which would be supplied to the Marienburg works.
(1 )
CRMgTSCKAU (Saxony) 50° 50« N. 12° 25« Es 545 ndles; (28,000) This town, which i s on the River P le isse 25 miles E. of Chemnitz, has a nunber of te x tile works and makers of machinery, none of which i s of great individual importance.
OJXHAVEN (Hanover) 53° 50’ N» 8° 40* E: 410 miles: (30,000) Situated at the mouth of the Elbe, th is port owes i t s development mainly to the Hamburg lin es which disembark their passengers here before proceeding up-stream to Hanburg. There are excellent port f a c ilit ie s and two small shipbuilding yards. The port i s now used as a base for mine sweepers and escort v essels and there are numerous naval establishments including an a r tille r y depot.
Shipbuilding The Port Area Cuxhaven (2) The port area contains quays, railway sidin gs, large storage sheds, now used as mine stores, two shipbuilding yards engaged on repair work, a naval a r tille r y depot and other naval establishm ents.
127
D A N Z I G
54° 20’ N. 18° 40’ E: 800 id le s: (260,000) The c ity of Leipzig is on the riv er V istula four miles from it s mouth. From Danzig the V istula flows northwards into the B a ltic .
Neufahrwasser the outer port of Danzig, is on the le f t bank close to the mouth of the river.
In the northern quarter of Danzig proper, along the banks of the V istula, are the important Schichau and Danziger Werft ship building yards. A cu t-o ff in the riv er V istula, known as the Kaiserhafen and about 1^ miles long, stretches from the Eastern end of the ship building area across a bend in the V istu la, which i t rejoin s halfway between Danzig and the river mouth. The port of Danzig with it s ship building and ship repairing a c tiv itie s , extends alongside these two waterways.
The principal docks are in the Holm, the island formed by the Kaiserhafen and the bend of the V istula.
The town it s e lf i s divided by the stream of the Mott lau, a tributary of the V istula. The north-west quarter con stitutes the old c ity , with the main railway station on i t s western border. Two branches of the railway run from the main station west of the riv er V istula to Neufahrwasser. A separate branch leaves the main lin e south of Danzig, en circles the city to the east, and serves the ports on the Kaiserhafen and the Holm Island as well as the railway repair shops on the right bank of the riv e r.
There are a number of large flour m ills and various industries in the central c ity area and in the Niederstadt (the south-east quarter of the town) , but it is as a ship and submarine building centre and as a naval and submarine base and arsenal that Danzig occupies a position of major importance.
T ransportat ion.
Marshalling Yards ' Kaiserhafen (3) Railway Repair Shops Kaiserhafen (2) These extensive yards and in sta lla tio n s are on the right bank of the V istula near to the Southern end of the Kaiserhafen. The railway sidings serving the quays and docks of the port area radiate from here. It is estimated that 2,000 workers are employed in the repair shops which before the war were the ch ief locomotive and ro llin g stock works supplying the Polish r a il­ ways. Ground in telligen ce suggests that in 1942 about 1,800 workers were employed, and that th is plant was p rin cip ally engaged on repair and maintenance of main lin e loconatives.
Goods Station O livaer Tor (j) Immediately north of the main railway station are large marshalling and goods yards from which the branch lin es radiate to the Schichau and the Danziger Werft ship building yards.
Repair Shops Werftgasse (j) The railway repair works of the Danziger Werft and Eisenbahnwerkstatten A.G. are between the
128
Olivaer Tor goods yards and Danziger .verft ship building yards.
Repair shops Broschkischerweg (j) The railway continues from the Olivaer Tor along the le ft bank of the Vistula to Neufahrwasser. The railway repair shops of the Waggonfabrik Danziger A.G. are on this line inraedlately beyond the Schichau ship building yards.
Marshalling Yards Lamentha1 (3) There are also large marshalling and goods yards along the second line connecting Danzig and Neufahrwasser which runs p arallel to and about one mile to the West of the Vistula.
Goods Station Leegetor (3) A smaller goods yard in the southern part of the town.
Public U tility Services.
Gas works Danzig (3) There are two municipal gas works, one in the northern quarter of the town on the le ft bank of the Mbttlau, close to its junction with the Vistula, and the second in the southern end of the town near to the Leegetor goods station. Their combined output in 1938 was about 85O m illion cubic feet.
•
E lectricity Works Bleihof (3) The municipal power station is inside the town area on the right bank of the Mottlau.
Liquid Fuels and Substitutes Petroleum Storage Schellmuhl (3) The storage tanks of the former Baltisch Amerikanische 01 Co. are on the le ft bank of the Vistula north of the city. They have capacity for 100,000 tons.
Oil Storage Danzig (3) There are a number of o il tank installations in the southern part of the town along either bank of the Mottlau. These have an estimated total capacity of 70,000 tons.
Oil Storage Neufahrwasser (3) Along the le ft bank of the Vistula inmediately south of Neufahrwasser and distributed over the open ground to the west of the river there are a number of o il storage tanks.
129
Ship Building
Schichauwerke
Danzig (1)
These large ship building yards are built along the left bank of the Vistula immediately north of the city. There are six main slipways, three of them 700 feet long. The yards are equipped for the construction of large merchant ships and tankers and all kinds of ship repair. They build submarines, and in 1943 were reported to be completing three monthly. They have also undertaken construction of floating docks and three of these, each with lifting capacity of 20,000 tons, were turned out during the early months of 1943« Danziger Werft Danzig (1) The second large Danzig ship building oonem is also in the northern part of the city further upstream from and almost adjacent to the Schiohau works. The yards of the Danziger Werft A.G. are on both banks of the Vistula, the area on the southern bark being the larger of the two. Their capacity is similar to that of Schiohau and they are also constructing submarines. Assault craft have been reported to be a speciality of these yards.
Wojan Schiffswerft Klawitter Schiffswerft
w <»
Strohdeich ).
These are two minor ship yards probably engaged on building and repair of small coastal vessels. Klawitter is on the tongue of land on the right bank of the Mottlau where it Joins the Vistula, and Wo J an is on the opposite bank of the Vistula near the suburb of Troyl.
Naval Base Der Holm (1) The chief naval establishment and arsenal are on the Holm Island, where there are two large and several smaller docks. The submarines using this harbour are moored along the bank of the Kaiserhafen where two or three large ships are permanently moored to serve as living quarters. There are a large rnmiber of buildings on the Holm serving as naval supply sheds and oil storage. Close to the south end of the Kaiserhafen several buildings of cement have been constructed on the Holm which are thought to be submarine pens or repair installations.
130
Chemicals and Explosives M ich A.G. Schellmuhl (-) The Chemische Fabrik M ich A.G. i s a subsidiary of the A.G. fü r Chemische Produktion in S te ttin . Their products are f e r t i l i s e r s .
Foodstuffs
Otto Wilde a .d . Gr. Muhle (-) The Grosse Muhle Danzig Otto Wilde A.G. has g ra in s ilo s w ith a capacity of 150,000 tons and a larg e flo u r m ill situ a te d in th e central c ity area.
Speiser & Co. a .d. Schneidemühle (-) A flo u r m ill s itu a te d in th e c ity area.
H. B a rte ls Baunbachallee • (-) A flo u r m ill in the suburb o f Langfuhr.
131
D A R M S T A D T (Hesse)
49° 50* N. 8° 40* E: 400 m iles: (110,000) Darmstadt is the ch ief adm inistrative town of Hesse. There are two important chemical works and a number of manufacturers of machinery. Most of the industries are grouped to the West of the town near to the main railway station but the larger of the two chemical works lie s to the North of the c ity . The m unicipality also includes the outlying suburb of Eberstadt, one mile to the south. Darmstadt is on the main railway lin e from North and Central Germany to Basle and Switzerland. I t is the Junction fo r several lin es leading to the Upper Rhine Valley and Württemberg.
Transportation Marshalling yards (WERK II) Darmstadt (2) On the west of the town and immediately north of the railway statio n are important marshalling and goods yards and railway repair shop.
Repair Shops (WERK l) Darmstadt (2) Large railway repair shops are situated in the northern quarter of the town.
Railway Junctions Darmstadt (3) North West of the town and between the Nord- and Haupt-Bahnhöfe are the junctions of the various lin es which meet in Darmstadt.
A ircraft and Aero Engines Botsch & Co. ' y Landwehr str. (3) This firm sp ecialises in the manufacture of g lid e r a irc ra ft.
Engineering and Armaments Venuleth & Ellenberger A.G-. Landwehrstr. (3) The Maschinenbauanstalt Venuleth & Elleriberger A.G. is a factory of some importance making agricultural machinery and machinery fo r the chemical industry.
152
DARMSTADT ( contd.)
Motorenfabrik Kirsohenallee (J) The Motorenfabrik Darmstadt A.G. are now reported to be making diesel engines.
This firm belongs to the Demag of Duisburg and is said to have employed some 800 workers in 1942.
Carl Sohenok Landwehrstr. (J) This firm makes industrial weighing machines, weighbridges, screens and vibro-conveyors. They are leading specialists in the testing of metals for vibrational and torsional stresses, and in constructing machinery for carrying out such tests.
Eisenwerk Eberstadt Eberstadt (J) The Eisenwerk Eberstadt Adolf Riesterer makes grinding machines and stone saws.
Goebel A.G. Mornewegstr. (-) This firm made printing and paper cutting and folding machines before the war.
Chemicals and Explosives
E. Merck Frankfurterstr. (1) It is believed that this works is now concentrating on products of direct war interest at the expense of its production of pharmaceuticals and fine chemicals, the most in^ortant of these products being hydrizine (used in explosives) and compounds of hydrogen peroxide.
Merck’s pre-war products can be divided into three sections 1. Pharmaceuticals and fine chemicals produced by Merck from basic raw materials. This includes (a) ascorbic acid, dextrose, lactic acid - from starch. (b) alkaloids from natural plants, mainly from the Dutch East Indies, some exceptions being opium from Turkey, ephedra from Spain, and . cocaine from Peru. (c) tannic acid from galls, from N.E.I.
/(d)
133
DARMSTADT (oontd.)
(d) hormones from glandular products obtained from Darmstadt and Frankfurt slaughter houses.
(e) metallic salts, including mercury and bismuth from Spain.
(f) vitamin D from ergosterol, made from yöast purchased locally.
2. Pharmaceuticals and fine chemicals produced by Merck from purchased intermediary products:- (g) barbiturates, i.e. Luminal, Veronal, Veramon, phenodorm, produced from intermediates purchased from the I.G.
(h) salicylic acid.
3. Chemical products bought, purified, and re-sold by Merck:-
This section includes a large variety of products including some which Merck also manufacture themselves from basic raw materials, i. e. lactose metallic salts.
Solvents were purchased mainly from Alexander Walker, Munich.
The following are approximate pre-war production figures of some of the more important Merck specialities:-
Luminal 2,000 kilos per month Veronal 1,100 it tt it Phenodorm 1,200 n w it Hydrogen peroxide 2,000 n it w Vigantol (Vitamin D) 2,000 n N n Cebion (ascorbic acid- 800 w If w Vitamin Cj Betabion (Vitamin B) 400 it If tt Dextrose 4,000 « It it Lactic acid and salts 10,000 it tt it Agricultural insecticides 10,000 It II n Salicylate s 10,000 It tt tt Iodides and Bromides 4,000 It tt « Glycerophosphates 800 It tt it Merck also shared with C. A. F. Kahlbaum G. m. b. H., Berlin a virtual monopoly of the production of analytical reagents supplied to institutes and laboratories for research and testing purposes.
In August 1938 the staff of Merck consisted of about 4,000 people as follows:- 150 chemists, 150 qualified engineers, 1,500 girls for packing, etc., 600 clerks, 2,600 workmen.
134
DARMSTADT (oontd. )
Röhm <fc Haas A.G. Weiter- * (21 Städter str.
This chemical factory specialised * formerly in chemicals for use in washing preparations and for the oil and varnish industries. The firm is also an important producer of toughened glass and has a second factory in Oberramstadt five miles South East of Darmstadt* Approximately 1,000 workers were employed in the Darmstadt factory before the war.
I
.
— ---oOo— — -
D A T T B I, N (Westphalia)
I
51° W H. 7° 20' E. 320 miles: (21,000) Datteln is an inportant junction on the German inland waterways system where the Lippe-Seiten canal joins the main Dortmund-Bras canal. Immediately South of Datteln is the Entocher- Lippe mine and coking plant.
Transportation
Canal Junction Datteln (2) This is one of the most vital junctions of the Ruhr waterways. The Lippe canal, leading from Lippstadt through Hamm and Ldnen, here joins the main Dortmund-Ems canal. The small inland port of Datteln has many silos and storage sheds built round the canal junction.
Solid Fuels
Bnsoher-Lippe Datteln (2) To the South of the town is the large coal mine known as the Gewerkschaft des Steinkohlenbergwerks, Emscher-Lippe which belongs to the Krupp concern. There are five shafts. Output of coal in 1937 was 1,766,000 tons. The two coking plants containing 190 coke ovens have an annual dry-coal capacity of 885,000 tons and form one of the sources of supply for the long­ distance gas system.
-- — o0o-
135
DEGGENDORF (Bavaria) •48° 50» N. 13° E: 650 m iles: (12,000) Deggendorf is on the l e f t bank of the Danube between pggenshi 1 rg and Passau* I t i s a to u r is t re s o rt fo r v is ito r s to the B ayerischer Y/ald, and has normally l i t t l e in d u s tria l sig n ifican ce, but the ship b u ild in g yards on th e Danibe are now reported to be very a c tiv e
Ship Building Schiffsw erft Deggendorf (3) The Deggendorfer Werft & Eisenbau G.m.b.H, is now reported to be constructing 2,000 h .p . steam paddle tugs and small screw tugs run on producer gas. Submarine p a rts are also said to be produced. The yards have a riv e r frontage of 1,200 metres and sane 700 workers were en^loyed here in 1943«
DEMMIN (Pomerania)
53° 55* N. 13° E: 580 m iles: (16,000) This town is on the riv e r Peene which is navigable up to th is p o in t. There i s a sugar fa c to ry and some sm all shipping a c tiv ity but the Demmin is c h iefly a market town.
DESOHOWITZ/
136
DESCHOWITZ (Upper Silesia)
50° 25* N. 18° 10’ E: 820 miles: * (15,000) Deschowitz, the German name of which is Odertal, lies on east bank of the river Oder, about 18 miles south-east of Oppeln and about 25 miles west of Gleiwitz. Industry here is dominated by the Schaffgotsch*sehe works consisting of the important Fischer^-Tropsch synthetic oil plant, and the adjoining coking plant and power station.
A sizeable workers colony tes been built, and the population is now believed to be about 15,000.
Public Utilities
Schaffgotsch’sche power station. Deschowitz (1) The power station lies in the Northern section of the industrial complex, and is owned by Gräflich Schaffgot seh’ sehe Werke G.m.b.H. of Gleiwitz. The station was originally built to supply steam and electricity to the adjoining coke ovens. When the synthetic oil plant was constructed, the capacity was greatly increased, and is now estimated at 75 W . South-west of the generating station there is a large open air sub­ station containing three transformers and 12 switches.
Supplies to the associated works are believed to be by low and medium voltage underground cables. A .high voltage long distance overhead transmission line connects to Blechhammer North. Two other similar, lines leave the sub-station and one is believed to connect to Kosel and the other to Oppeln.
Solid Fuels
Schaff gotsch’sehe Werke East of Deschowitz (2) Situated just to the east of Deschowitz, the coking plant is owned by Gräflich Schaffg o tsch* sehe Werke, G.nub.H, There are 120 ovens having an annual' estimated dry coal capacity of 840,000 tons.
Liquid Fuels and Substitutes Schaff go tsch ’sehe synthetic oil plant. Deschowitz (2) The Schaffgotsch*sehe industrial complex is situated just to the east of Deschowitz and adjoining the Oppeln-Ratibor railway line, and covers about J- square mile. The power station occupies the northern section, and the coking plant the central section of the complex (for both of these,see above).
This Fischer-Tropsch synthetic oil plant is owned by Schaffgotsch‘sehe Benzin G.m.b.H., and has an estimated capacity of 110,000 tons of oil products per annum. It is believed that oil is conveyed by pipe line from Deschowitz to the port of Kosel on the river Oder, and thence to the Mittelland Kanal. 2/3,000 workers are said to be employed in two shifts at the synthetic oil plant alone.
137
D E S S A U (Anhalt)
51° 50* N. 12° 10’ Es 530 M iles: (200,000) Dessau i s th e c h ie f town o f the S ta te of Anhal t and i s now mwi n~ly impo rta n t as a head q u arters of the Junkers concern, which has fo u r sep arate works and an a i r f i e l d c lo se to th e town.
Dessau i s s itu a te d on th e railw ay lin e between Magdeburg and L eipzig, one of the main railw ay connections between N.W. Germany and Saxony. The A dm inistrative are a in clu d es W allw itz, one m ile n o rth of the town c e n tre and on the r iv e r E lbe, and R osslau, an o u tly in g suburb on the n o rth ern bank of the Elbe.
T ran sp o rtatio n
x
Railway Ju n ctio n Dessau (3) From Rosslau a branch lead s to W ittenberg (on the main lin e from B e rlin to south-w est Germany) and from Dessau a branch lead s to th e main Magdeburg-Halle lin e and through Bernburg to W estern Germahy. There are goods yards and a sm all m arsh allin g yard im m ediately n o rth of the main railw ay s ta tio n .
Railway R epair Shops Dessau (J ) On the sou thern o u ts k ir ts of th e town i s a railw ay r e p a ir shop which i s noted on pre-w ar maps as a re p a ir shop f o r e le c tr ic locom otives.
■Liquid Fuels and S u b stitu te s
Hydrierwerke Rodleben (3) This works was form erly known as the T etralinw erke.
I t i s b e lie v e d s t i l l to be producing t e tr a le n e and s im ila r so lv e n ts , and a ls o e th y l.a lc o h o l; both products are obtained by s y n th e tic p ro cess from brown coal v ia w ater gas.
A irc ra ft and Aero Engines
Junkers
A ir f ie ld (1 )
The paren t works of the Junkers Flugzeug and Motorenwerk A.G. are ad jacen t to th e la rg e Junkers a i r f i e l d which i s im m ediately to th e west of the town, and extend northw ard from the railw ay lin e Dessau-Köthen to the road from Dessau to K lein Kfthnau. The v illa g e s o f K lein Ktthnau and A lten are re s p e c tiv e ly a t th e n o rth ­ west and th e south-w est c o rn e rs o f th e a ir f ie ld .
The engine works, making both D ie se l and p e tro l engines, are im m ediately e a s t of A lten and sep arated from th e a i r f i e l d only by th e railw ay lin e . The airfram e works a d jo in th e e a s te rn p o rtio n of th e a i r f i e l d . These works are used m ainly f o r th e c o n stru c tio n of a i r c r a f t and aero-engine p ro to ty p e s which a re te s te d on the a d jo in in g a i r f i e l d . One of th e c h ie f a c t i v i t i e s
138
of the Dessau works i s to construct a number of each approved design, su fficie n t to enable the process of se ria l production to be worked out in d e ta il. The actual s e ria l production is then undertaken by other a irc ra ft works.
Another major a c tiv ity here is the large scale manufacture of airscrews and p a rtic u larly hubs.
I t is believed th at approximately 35% of the to ta l German output of the la t te r are turned out here. In 1942 Junkers Dessau were believed to employ nearly 10,000 workers.
Ship Building
Sachsenberg Rosslau (2) The ship building yards of the Gebrüder Sachsenberg A.G. are on the north bank of the Elbe in the outlying suburb of Rosslau. They sp ecialise in lig h t hi$h-speed c ra ft such as "E" boats, small torpedo launches, speed boats and riv e r c ra ft and they are also builders of dredgers.
Engineering and Armaments * G. Polysius A.G. B rauereistr. (3) These works now belong to the Junkers concern.
They are situated on the railway between the town and the Junkers aero engine works. They are now in use as an arms factory and are believed to be making machine guns fo r a irc ra ft, also A.A. guns.
Government Factory. Gr. Kübnau (-) A government factory is reported to have been constructed at Gr. Kühnau, 1,300 yards north­ west of the Junkers a ir f ie ld , and is said to produce electron metal fo r a irc ra ft and armaments. Confirmatory evidence is not available, but i t is thought th at th is factory is more lik ely to be engaged on magnesium fab ricatio n .
Hugo Junkers Junkerstr. (3) The Kaloriferwerk Hugo Junkers G.m.b.H. specialise in heating, a ir conditioning and v en tila tin g p lan ts, also in heating and cooling apparatus for the chemical industry. I t is believed th at at lea st one department of th is re la tiv e ly small factory has been converted to the manufacture of fuel injection pumps.
Junkers & Co. Junkersstr. (3) Junkers and Co. G.m.b.H. which was formerly a Joint undertaking with the Kaloriferwerk Hugo Junkers, now belongs to Robert Bosch of S tu ttg a rt.
139
The factory’s pre-war products were gas water­ heating apparatus.
Bamag
Dessau (2)
The Berlin-Anhaltische Maschinenbau A. G., the Dessau works of the Bamag -Meguin A. G., construct heavy engineering plant and before the war were mainly engaged, on machinery and equipment for the gas industry. They are now reported to have taken up the manufacture of naval and A. A. guns in a t le a st one of the departments.
Waggonfabrik A lbrechtstr. (3) The Dessauer Waggonfabrik, which belongs to Orenstein and Koppel, makes railway waggons and coaches and, before the war, employed approxi­ mately 1,000 workers. ' .
Chemicals and Explosives Dessauer Werke fu r Zucker und Chemische Industrie A.G.
Rosslau (3)
This works is one of the larg est German sugar re fin e rie s. They also : (a) Make th e ir own refining agents, e. g. strontium s a lts . (b) Recover by-products from sugar refin in g resid u es,e.g . potassium s a lts .
!
c) Make cyanide from the Schlempe (residues), d) Make small quantities of chemicals derived from sugar, e.g. E ry th rito l.
D E T M O L D (Lippe) 51° 55’ N. 8° 55’ E: 390 miles: (20,000) Detmold is the adm inistrative centre of the small s ta te of Lippe. There are some furniture fa c to rie s, lithographic establish­ ments and a small b isc u it factory but no industries of importance.
DILLINGEN (Saar)
O
n 49 20* N. 6° 45’ E: 340 miles: (14,200) Dillingen is on the main lin e from T rier to Saarbrücken and is five m iles north-west of S a a rlo u is . I t is the junction fo r a branch lin e leading from the valley of the riv e r Prims to Neunkirchen, There are a few small foundries and makers of machinery, but the town is mainly inportant fo r the large steelworks described below:
140
Solid. Fuels A.G. der D illin g er Hüttenwerke D illingen. (3) The coke ovens attach ed to the f i r n ’s s te e l plant number 148, and have a maximum rated dry coal capacity of 667,000 tons per annum.
Iron, S te e l and Ferro-A lloys Hüttenwerke D illingen (2) The A. G. der D illenger Hüttenwerke have im portant s te e l works and r o llin g m ills.
There are fo u r b la s t furnaces, s ix Martin furnaces, two cupolas, and a larg e ro llin g m ill. Before the war 6,000 workers were employed and the capacity was 400,000 tons of pig iro n and 600,000 tons o f s te e l per annun.
------ — 0O 0-----------
DINSLAKEN (Rhineland) See under DUISBURG-
141
DITTERSBACH (Silesia) See under Waldenburg.
DOBELN (Saxony)
51° 15* N. 13° 5* E: 570 miles: (25,000) Dobeln is a small manufacturing town in the valley of the river Mulde 30 miles West of Dessau. It contains a number of minor factories making machinery, metal foundries and also a small tobacco and cigar making industry. None of these are of individual importance.
— — --o0o--- - DONAUWORTH (Bavaria)
48° 45* N. 10° 50* E: 520 miles: (5,500) Donauworth is on the left bank of the Danube 20 miles North of Augsburg. The main line from Frankfort/Main to Munich crosses the Danube here and branch lines lead West to Ulm and East to Ingolstadt. The town has little industry in peacetime but the plant mentioned below has increased in importance during the war.
Engineering and Armaments Maschinenfabrik Donauworth Donauworth (3) A factory was reported in 1942 to be employing a large number of workers on the manufacture of trench mortars. This is probably the Maschinenfabrik Donauworth G.m.b.H«, in peace time the only engineering works in the town and said to have been converted to armaments production.
DORMAGEN (Rhineland) 51° 5» N. 6° 35* E: 295 miles: (4,000) Dormagen is on the main line West of the Rhine halfway between Koln and Neuss. It has no important industries other than that mentioned below.
Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper I.G. Farbenindustrie Dormagen ($) The I.G. have a factory at Dormagen making Cuprammonium rayon and staple fibres. The capacity in 1939 was 24 tons per day.
o0o-<
142
D O R T M U N D (Westphalia) 51° 30» N. 7° 30» E: 325 miles: (640,000) The area covered here extends in the North from Henrichenburg to Bergkamen including Waltrop, Lippholthausen and Lünen, covers Kamen and Holzwickede in the East; Horde to the South; and Westrich, Bodelschwingh and Ostrich in the West. The map showing these boundaries is inserted at the end of th is book.
Dortmund with 550,000 inhabitants is the largest and most easterly town in the Ruhr. I t is one of the chief centres of heavy industry in Germany and besides the large steel works is f u ll of smaller concerns engaged in engineering of a ll kinds. The town’ s geographical position at the eastern extremity of the Ruhr, at the terminus of the Dortmund-fins Canal, and in the centre of the Westphalian coal fie ld s make i t one of the busiest commercial centres in Germany.
Although most of the marshalling yards in the Dortmund d is tric t are r e la tiv e ly small i t i s , next to Duisburg, the p rin cip al transport centre of the Ruhr p a rticu la rly fo r through t r a ff ic to Central, North and Eastern Germany. The harbour situated at the terminus of the Dortmund-Ems Canal is of particular, importance.
Dortmund proper has only one power station which though large is of local importance only. Though there are several e le c tr ic power plants in the v ic in ity of the c ity they are a ll p riv ately owned concerns of comparatively small capacity and concerned only with the p its or works to which they belong. Gas is obtained fron the Ruhr Gas Grid. .There is an important V.E.W. station at Lünen with a capacity of 135 MW.
There are two important industrial area in Dortmund. The fir s t lie s on the western side of the t own and contains the very important harbour and two marshalling yards and south of the harbour, the large steel works of the Dortmund Hörder Hüttenverein A.G.
The second area lie s to the north east of . the c ity and consists of the huge Hoesch steelworks, the Hoesch-Benzin G.m.b.H.
Fischer-Tropsch plant and a marshalling yard which envelopes the north western side of the steelworks; also within th is area is the Minister Stein concern with coke ovens, a by-products plant, and the power plant.
Scattered throughout the town are numerous plants of secondary importance, the majority of which are engaged on engineering.
At Hürde, to the south-east of Dortmund lie s the Dortmund Hörder Hüttenverein, a subsidiary of the Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G. and in it s western portion the coking plant. In the north there are two important concerns; at Kamen a Fischer Tropsch plant, and west of Lünen on the Seiten Canal the Lippewerk of the Vereinigte Aluminium Werke A.G. ° Outside Dortmund there are numerous coke oven plants including MHansaM, the Second largest in Germany, and several c o llie ry concerns.
To the extreme North West of the area is the ship-lift and the shaft­ lock at the junction of the Dortmund-Ems and Rhein-Herne canals. /Transportation
145
Dortmunder Hafen Dortmund (2) The harbour is the terminus of the Dortmund-Ems canal which is the link "between the Westphalian industrial area and. the North Sea* The canal has been rebuilt to be navigable to vessels of 1,500 tons deadweight but as the Henrichburg locks is restricted to vessels of 1,000 tons, no vessels of greater tonnage can penetrate to Dortmund. There are the usual quays and harbour facilities which extended to within 1 m.
North East of the main station. The volume of goods handled in 1938 amounted to 4,000,000 (inwards) and 1,400,000 (outwards). Adjoining the harbour to the west lies the Versohiebebahnhof (see below).
Henricheriburg Locks Henricheriburg (2) The shaft look and the ship-lift are situated at the junction of the Dortmund-Ems and the Rhein-Herne canals, and are 9 m. North West of Dortmund main station. The lift is capable of raising vessels of 1,000 tons dead­ weight.
Canal Embankment Waltrop (2) The embanked stretch of the Dortmund-Ems canal is situated 7J miles N.N.W. of Dortmund main station and 2^ East of the Henrichburg locks. The embankment extends just over £ mile, in length.
Marshalling Yard Dortmunderfeld (3) Situated 1 mile South West of the main station, the yards have an estimated capacity of 3,000 wagons per 24 hours.
Marshalling Yard Dorstfeld (3) Situated 2 miles West of Dortmund main station, the yards have an estimated capacity of 2,500 wagons per 2^ hours.
Marshalling Yard Dortmund (2) Known as the ”Verschiebebahnhof” the yards, nearly 2 miles in length, adjoin the canal terminus (see ’’Dortmunder Hafen” above), and have an estimated capacity of 4,800 wagons per 24 hours. There is a large workshop at the South end of the yards.
Marshalling Yard Dortmund-Stid These yards lie 1 mile South East of the main station and adjoin Dortmund-Stid station. They have an estimated capacity of 2,400 per 24 hours.
Marshalling Yard Dortmund-Eving (3) Situated miles North East of Dortmund main station, adjoining the Hoesch steelworks, the yards have an estimated capacity of 2,000 wagons per 24 hours. /llarshalling yard.
144
Marshalling yard Holzwickede (3) The yards lie 7 miles E.S.E. of Dortmund, main station and have an estimated capacity of 2,400 wagons per 24 hours.
Public Utility Services Lunen Power Station Lunen (1) Situated 6J miles N.N.E. of Dortmund the station is owned by Steinkohlen-Elektrizitätes A.G. The main purpose of the station, which consists of 3 turbo-generator sets and has a capacity of 135 MW., is to supply the Lippewerk plant of Vereinigte Aluminium Werke A.G. which is J mile North West., and consumes 1,000 million kWh. per annum. It is also connected to the grid.
The open-air substation, which is owned by V.E. W., is to the North of the station and contains three transformers and nine high-voltage switches. Two double-circuit lines, probably operating at 110 kV., lead respectively West towards Castrop-Rauxel, and East towards Kamen: a third line connects to Buis, and a fourth to Stockum., V.E.W. power station Dortmund (1)
t t
Owned by Vereinigte Elektrizitätswerke Westfalen, the station is situated in the ।east of the city.
There are 6 turbo-generator sets with an estimated capacity of 116 MW. The station is connected by several 10 kV lines with Kruckel and thus linked UP with the 110 kV grid. There are no long­ distance supplies.
Dortmunder Union Power Station. Dortmund (3) Owned by Dortmunder Union Brückenbau, the power station is situated about 1 mile South-West of Dortmund main station. It supplies power to the Dortmunder Union and Rothe Erde iron and steel plant. The capacity is believed to be 47 MW, H&rde Power Station Hftrde (3) Attached to the Horde steel works, the capacity is believed to be 47 MW.
Minister Stein Power Station Eving (-) Situated adjoining the colliery, 2 miles North of Dortmund, the power station is owned by Gelsenkirchener Bergwerks A.G. It has an estimated capacity of 11 MW. and . supplies the adjacent colliery and coking plant (see under "Solid Riels"), and also the steelworks of the Dortmund group of Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G, (see under "Iron and Steel").
Gneisenau Power Station D e m e (-) Situated 4J miles North-East of Dortmund, the power station is owned by Harpener Bergbau A.G.
There are two generating sets having an estimated /capacity
145
capacity of 15 MW. The station also supplies steam to the Gneisenau coking ovens (see under ’’Solid Riels”) Dorstfeld 2/^ Power Station West of Dortmund (-)
The power station is owned by Essener Steinkohlen­ bergwerke A. G. and is situated South East of Dorstfeld Pit 2/3, 2 miles South West of Dortmund main station.
Power is supplied to the coke oven plants adjoining, at Oespel, and to the Dorstfeld colliery (see under ’’Solid fuels"). The capacity of the station is estimated at 11 MW.
Monopol Power Station Kamen (3) Owned by E ssener Steinkohlenbergwerke A.G. the plant is situated adjoining the colliery, 9i miles north­ east of Dortmund main station. There are 5 steam turbines with an estimated capacity of 40 MW. The plant serves the Monopol colliery (see under "Solid Fuels"), and the synthetic oil plant at Bergkamen (see under "Liquid Riels").
Municipal Gasworks. Lindenhorst (3)
Owned by Dortmunder Gaswerk A.G. The gasworks are situated 1J miles east north-east of Dortmund main station. The station sold 1,000 million cubic feet of gas in 1936. Gas is supplied mainly by the Dorstfeld coking plant,
Kaiserstuhl Power Station Dortmund. _ (3)
Situated within the Hoesch A.G. steelworks ccmplex, the power station works in conjunction with the colliery, coking plant, and the steelworks. There are 5 generator sets having an estimated capacity of 33 MW. (See also under "Solid Fuels" and under "Iron and Steel"),
Hoesch Benzin Power Station Wambelerholz (3)
This power station is owned by and supplies power to the Hoesch Benzin synthetic oil plant, (see under "Liquid Fuels"), It lies about 2j miles north-east of Dortmund main station, and just east of the steelworks. The capacity is estimated at 18 MW.
Solid Riels
Grimberg coking plant Bergkamen (2) Owned by Essener Steinkohlenbergwerke A.G., the plant is situated 10 miles N.N.E. of Dortmund station. There are 128 ovens having an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 970,000 tons. The plant operates in conjunction with the company’s Fischer-Tropsch synthetic oil plant nearby (see under "Liquid fuels").
Minister Stein coking plant Eving (2)
Situated adjoining the colliery, 2 miles North of Dortmund main station, the plant is owned by Gelsenkirchener Bergwerks A.G. There are 130 / ovens
146
ovens having an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 1,000,000 tons, Gas is supplied to the Ruhr gas grid. The plant has its own power station (see under "Public Utilities").
Dorstfeld coking plant W. of Dortmund (3) Owned by Essener Steinkohlen-bergwerke A.G., the plant is situated at the Dorstfeld colliery, pit ^3, and lies 2 miles West of Dortmund station.
There are 120 ovens working which have an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 408,000 tons. The plant has its own power station (see under "Public Utilities") and gas is supplied by long distance pipe line to Dortmund town. It is believed that 40 additional ovens were under construction in 1943.
Tremonia coking plant S.W. of Dortmund (3) Owned by Gelsenkirchener« Bergwerks A.G., the plant is located 1 mile South West of Dortmund. Tfcere 95 ovens which have an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 300,000 tons.
Hansa coking plant Huckarde (1) This is the 2nd largest coking plant in Germany, it is owned by Gelsenkirchener Bergwerks A.G. and is located 2$ miles North West of Dortmund main station. There are 29O coke ovens having an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 2,005,000 tons.
Gas is supplied to the Ruhr gas grid.
Waltrop coking plant Waltrop (3) Owned by Bergwerksgesellschaft Hibernia, the plant is located 7 miles N.N.W. of Dortmund main station.
There are 125 ovens having an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 285,000 tons. Gas is supplied to the Ruhr gas grid.
Oespel coking plant Oespel (3) The plant is situated 4 miles South West of Dortmund main station and is owned by the Essener Stein­ kohlenbergwerke A.G. There are 45 ovens having an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 200,000 tons of dry coal per annum. Power is supplied from the Dorstfeld power station(see under "Public Utilities"), and gas to Dortmund town by the long distance pipe line, augmenting the supply from Dorstfeld coking plant.
Westhausen Coking Plant Westhausen (3) Owned by Gelsenkirchener Bergwerks A.G. the plant is situated 4 miles North West of Dortmund main station.
There are 80 ovens having an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 370,000 tons.
/Victoria coking plant
Victoria coking plant Lünen (3) The plant is located adjoining the Victoria colliery, 8 miles North East of Dortmund and 1 mile East of Lünen. It is owned by Harpener Bergbau A.G. There are 170 ovens with an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 450,000 tons. (Colliery, see below).
Gneisenau coking plant Derne (2) Owned by Harpener Bergbau A. G, the plant is situated at Gneisenau colliery, 4i miles North East of Dortmund station^ There are 130 ovens having an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 1,046,000. power is supplied by the Gneisenau power station (see under "Public Utilities").
Kaiser stuhl coking plant Dortmund (2) The plant lies in the centre of the Hoesch A.G. steelworks, about 2 miles North East of Dortmund main station. There are 3^3 ovens having an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 1,500,000 tons. (See also under "Iron and Steel" and "Public Utilities").
Hbrder Hüttenverein coking plant Hftrde (3) Owned by Dortmund Hörder H^ttenverein the plant is adjacent to the blast-furnace works, 2j miles S.S.E. of Dortmund main station. There are 195 ovens having an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 620,000 tons. Gas supplied to the Ruhr gas grid.
Minister Achenbach coking plant Brambauer (3) Owned by Gebrüder Stumm G.m. b. H. The plant is situated adjoining the colliery, 5i miles North of Dortmund main station. There are 102 ovens having an annual estimated dry coal capacity of 420,000 tons (Colliery, see below, and see also under "Liquid fuels").
Dorstfeld collieries W. & S.W. Of Dortmund (3) Pit 1/4 is located 2 miles West and pit 2/3 2 miles South West of Dortmund main station.
The colliery is owned by Essener Steinkohlenberg­ werke A.G. The output of hard coal in 1937 was 1,259,000 tons. The compnay has its own power station adjoining Pit 2/3 (see under "Public Utilities").
Monopol colliery Kamen (3) Situated 9^ miles North East of Dortmund main station near Kamen, it is owned by Essener Steinkohlenbergwerke A.G.; in 1937 the mine produced 2,162.000 tons of hard coal. It has its own power station (see under "Public Utilities").
/Minister
- 148 -
Minister Stein colliery Eving (3) Owned by Gelsenkirchener Bergwerks A.G* , the colliery is situated 2 miles North of Dortmund. The output of hard coal in 1937 amounted to 2,000,000 tons. The company’s coking plant lies adjacent and has its own power station, (see under "Public Utilities”).
Fürst Herdenburg colliery N. of Dortmund (3) Situated 2^ miles M. of Dortmund near the Ems canal, the colliery is owned by Gelsenkirchener Bergwerks A. G. , and in 1937 produced 1 ,362,000 tons of hard coal. The colliery has its own harbour on the East bank of the canal.
Gneisenau colliery N.E. of Dortmund (3) The colliery, which includes the Scharnhorst colliery, is owned by Harpener Bergbau A.G, and is located West of Dortmund-Derac station.
In 1937 the combined output amounted to 1,580,000 tons of hard coal. The colliery has its own power station at the Gneisenau Pit (see under "Public Utilities").
Ickern colliery N.W. of Dortmund (See under "Castrop-Rauxel”).
Victoria colliery Lünen (3) Owned by Harpener Bergbau A.G. The colliery is situated 8 miles North East of Dortmund main station and North of the R. Lippe, 1 mile East of Lünen.
The output of hard coal in 1937 amounted to 1,156,000 tons.
Kaiserstuhl 1/2 colliery Dortmund (3) Owned by Hoesch A. G* the colliery is situated in the centre of the steelworks complex about 2 miles North East of Dortmund main station. 1,560,000 • tons of hard coal were produced in 1937• Minister Achenbach colliery Brambauer (3)
I
Owned by Gebrüder Stumm G*m.b.H. the colliery is located 5$ miles North of Dortmund station. In 1937 the output of hard coal amounted to 1,6j92,OOO tons. The colliery has its own harbour, 1 mile South West on the Dortmund Ems canal, Zollern 1/2 colliery Kirchlinde (3)
I
Owned by Gelsenkirchener Bergwerks A.G, the colliery is located at Kirchlinde, 3f miles West of Dortmund.
In 1937 the output of hard coal amounted to 1,170,000 tons.
/Liquid Fuels
149
Liquid Fuels
Hoesch Benzin G.m.b.H.
Wambelerholz (2)
The synthetic oil plant is situated. 2j miles North east of Dortmund, main station, and adjoining the Eastern boundary of the Hoesch iron and steelworks. The Fischer-Tropsch process is used, the works having an estimated capacity of 90,000 tons of oil per annum.
Storage capacity is estimated at 2.0,000 tons.
The plant produces petrol, gas-oil and lubricants, and is believed to employ some 450 workers.
The works has its own power station (see under "Public Utilities").
Chemische Werke Essener Stein Kohle A.G. Bergkamen (2) This Fischer Tropsch synthetic oil plant is situated 10 miles N.N.E. of Dortmund main station, adjoining the Grimberg coking plant (see under "Solid fuels"). The plant covers 90 acres and has an estimated capacity of 100,000 tons of oil per annum, and storage for 16,000 tons. The plant produces petrol, gas-oil and lubricants.
Schmitz oil plant N.W. of (3) Dortmund.
Schmitz Westfälische Mineralöl und Asphalt Werke is situated !§■ miles North West of Dortmund main station. The plant produces low grade lubricating oils from petroleum residues. Through out capacity is believed to be 20,000 tons per annum.
Oil Storage Tanks Tankweg (-) The whole of the street called Tankweg is concerned with oil storage and is owned by various firms. The total storage capacity is estimated at about 5>000 tons, of which 1,000 tons capacity is owned by Shenania Ossag A.G. - Iron and Steel and Ferro-Alloys ‘ _ Hoesch Steelworks korth East (1) Dortmund
The "Eisen und Stahlwerke" of Hoesch A.G. occupy nearly 1 square mile and are situate,d 1 mile North east of Dortmund main station.
There are 7 blast furnaces having an estimated annual capacity of 1,000,000 tons of pig iron; 4 Thomas converters and 8 open-hearth furnaces having a crude-steel capacity estimated at 1,250,000 tons per annum. Electric steel is also made. There are rolling mills etc. which turn out the normal extensive range of products.
There is also a continuous strip rolling mill, which is one of the only two in Germany - the other being at Dinslaken. The works are
/believed
150
believed to employ 20,000-22,000 workers.
The company has its own power station (see under "Public Utilities"). "Werk Dortmund West Dortmund (1) Owned by the Dortmund-Hftrder Hhttenverein A.G-. group Of Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G-. The works are situated just West of the main station and extend North to the canal harbour. There, are 5 blast furnaces with an estimated annual capacity of 850,*$00 tons of pig iron; 6 25-ton Thomas converters and 5 open-hearth furnaces having an estimated annual capacity of 1,000,000 tons of crude steel. The rolling mills, capable of handling the whole of the steel output, produce bars, sections, girders, rails, sheet piling, universal plates and sheets. There are forges and a steel foundry which produce all types of steel castings. Large quantities of steel are supplied to Dortmunder Union Brllckenbau-A.G-. works (see under "Engineering"). The works were originally known for their bridge building, but this has been transferred to the Brückenbau works.
The formerly associated foundries are now separate, subsidiary (see "Rothe Erde" below). Between 12,000 and 15,000 workers are reported to be employed.
The plant has its own power station (see under "Public Utilities").
Werk Hbrde Hbrde (1) Owned by the Dortmund Harder Hhttenverein A.G. group of Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G-., the works are in two quite distinct parts about £ mile apart, the first comprising the blast furnaces and coke ovens lies J miles South of Dortmund railway station, and South of the Dortmund-Unna railway line; the second area containing the rolling mills etc., is i mile further East, and North of the same railway. There are 5 blast furnaces having an estimated annual capacity of 750,000 tons of pig iron; 5 25-ton Thomas converters and 10 open- hearth furnaces with an estimated capacity of 1,000,000 tons of crude steel per annum. The nearby rolling mills, capable of absorbing the whole of the steel output, produce bars, sections, rails and plates, and are also reported to produce frames and pressed parts for motor vehicles. The ship­ plate mill is of recent construction. The works are belived to employ about 18,000 workers.
Rothe Erde Dortmund Tremoniastr. (3)
Eisenwerk Rothe Erde G.nub.H. is situated 1 mile South west of the main station. The company was formerly associated with Dortmund-Hbrder Hdttenverein but is now a separate subsidiary of Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G. The plants have large foundries and a railway equipment shop.
/Non-Ferrous Metals
151
fl on-Ferrous Metals
C.W. Kayser
S.W. of Jjunen 1(2)
Hüttenwerke C.W. Kayser A.G. is situated. 62 miles North, north east of Dortmund main station. The works are engaged on electrolytic copper refining and have an estamateo. capacity ' of 15,000 tons per annum. There is also extensive equipment for dealing with scrap.
Lippewerk Lippholthausen|(i) Owned by Vereinigte Aluminium Werke A. G.,. this is the second largest aluminium producer in Germany and accounts for 17 per cent of her total, output. The works produces aluminium from bauxite and! has an estimated annual capacity of 45,000 tons of aluminium. There is also a full-scale plant for the manufacture of alumina from local clay, but this plant is not now operating.
Engineering and. Armaments Brückenbau - A.G. Dortmund. (3) Dortmunder Union Brückenbau - A.G. works are situated immediately West of Weik Dortmund steel works, and about 1 mile West of the main station. The works specialises in bridges of all types but also makes a variety of structural steel products. Steel is supplied by the adjacent steelworks (Weik Dortmund).
Edelstahl N. Dortmund (3) Deutsche Edelstahlwerke A.G. have a small works in Sunderweg about -J mile North of the main station, which makes special steel magnets.
Maschinenfabrik Deutschland N.E. Dortmund (5) Situated immediately South of the Eving marshalling yard, Maschinenfabrik Deutschland A. G. is owned by the Hbesch concern. It is believed to be producing mining machinery and some machine tools.
C.H. Jucho Wambel. (3) Dortmunder Bruckenbrau C.H. Jucho have one works adjoining and south of the railway 2^ miles East of Dortmund main station, another works is situated about 1 mile East of the station. The firm are makers of bridges and similar construction.
Maschinenbau & Bahnbedarf Dortmund (2 ) Maschinenbau & Bahnbedarf A. G., formerly owned by and known as Orenstein & Koppel, are reported to have 3 works in Dortmund: (1) 2 miles W.S.W., (2) miles N.N.W., and (3) miles N.E. of the main station. The firm is a well-known maker of railway rolling stock including narrow-gauge stock. /They
152
They had a pre-war capacity of 1,700 standard 20-ton wagons per annum.
Wagner & Co* Dortmunderfeld (j) Situated adjoining the railway marshalling yard*, Wagner & Co. Werzeug-Maschinenfabrik G.m*b.H* make tyre and wheel mill equipment, planing machines, presses, punches, and shearing machines* There are reported to be about 700 workers.
Concordia Elektrizit&ts A.G. Dortmund (-> Owned by Accumulatorenfabrik, of Berlin, these works make machines for accumulator manufacture and also underground portable ’ lamps*
Brown Boveri & Co* N* Dortmund (—) This branch of the famous firm is situated 1 mile North of Dortmund main station, and specialises in heavy electrical equipment ,of all kinds.
"Westfalia" Lünen (-) Situated at Lünen, 7i miles North East of Dortmund, "Westfalia" Gewerkschaft Eisenhütte make chain and rope haulage equipment* Er* Dalzer Dortmund (-) Maschinenfabrik Friedrich Delzer K.G. are producers of ventilation vans and similar equipment for mines.
Schluchteimann & Kremer-Baum A.G, Dortmund (j) Komebachstr.
The firm are manufacturers of coal-cleaing and ore-dressing plant and other mining machinery, and are reported to employ some 1,600 workers.
Holstein & Kappert Wambel (3) J uchostr.
Situated 2$ miles East of Dortmund main station, the Holstein & Kappert Maschinenfabrik Phoenix G*m*b.H. were engaged before the war on agricultural machinery and implements.
There were 550 workers. They are now probably engaged on repairing A*F.Vs. Immediately adjoining to the North is a repair workshop, reported to be staffed by Fr. Krupp of Essen, and to be engaged on A.F.V. repairs.
Maschinenwerk Hermann Meier Dortmund (-) Saarlandstr.
This small works is situated about 1 mile South of the main station and is reported to be making galvanised sheets, including corrugated sheets, and similar products. /Hammerwerk
153
Hammerwerk Hoeach $• Dortmund (-) Owned by the Hoeach ateelworka concern, theae hammer and press shops are situated a few hundred yards south of the main Hoes ch works complex adjoining the railway.
Chemicals and Explosives Russwerk Dortmund G^m.b.H. Lutgeheidestr. (3) The firm produces carbon black from raw materials obtained from coking plants and its capacity is estimated at 3j5$O tons per annum.
Vereinigte Sauers toff werke - N. Dortmund (-) The plant is situated about 1g4 miles North of Dortmund at the Northern end of the harbour.
The works are owned by I.G. Farbenindustrie and produce acids, oxygen etc.
Danco Wetzell & Co. A.G. N. Dortmund (-) Vereinigte Asl?estwerke Danco Wetze11 & Co.
A.G-. are situated about lg miles North of Dortmund main station and East of the harbour.
The works produces asbestos millboard and asbestos textiles.
Foodstuffs
Mühlen Werke N. Dortmund (-) The Dortmunder Mlihlen-Werke A.G. are located in Kanalstr. about 1-g miles North of Dortmund main station. There are grain stores having an estimated capacity of 35>00° tons.
154
D R E E T Z (Brandenburg) 52° 50’ N. 12° 25* E: 560 miles: (1,250) Dreetz is a small v illag e approximately 25 miles North Vfest of Nauen on the main lin e from B erlin to Hamburg.
Chemicals and Explosives Explosive ’Jorks. Dreetz (3) The ownership of th is factory is unknown, but i t s layout so exactly corresponds to the factory a t K lietz th at i t is probably also a Dynamit p lan t. The factory has been constructed since the war, and was f i r s t detected by photograph reconnais­ sance. A single ground report has con­ firmed th at i t was v irtu a lly complete in November, 1943* The factory is about two-
t
th ird s the size of th a t a t K lietz, and is plainly engaged on the same a c tiv itie s .
I t is situated in the Forst-Grunau, north west of B erlin.
D R E S D E N (Saxony) 51° 3* N. 13° 45* E: 600 miles: (640,000) Dresden, the c a p ital of Saxony, is situated on both banks of the rive Elbe, and stands a t approximately 36O fe e t above sea level. The le f t bank, with the A ltsta d t, or old town, as nucleus is the larger of the two p arts; in i t are found the commercial centre, the re sid e n tia l area and public buildings, and some industries, mainly in i t s S-Suburbs. Neustadt, on the right bank, and i t s suburbs contain in d u stria l centres and adm inistration.
/ i n peace time
155
DRESDEN (Continued.) In peace time tobacco, chocolate and confectionery < manufacture played a large part in Dresden’s industrial activity^ there are also a large number of light engineering works and makers of machinery which are now engaged on all kinds of war production, many of which are too small to be listed individually. Several important factories are making electric motors, precision and optical instruments and chemicals.
The munitions workshops in the old arsenal occupy an extensive area to the North of Neustadt, along the railway to Klotsohe, in the industrial region which extends past the aerodrane to the Dresdner Heide. In the Heide, a large heath, munitions are reported to be stored in quantities.
Dresden is an important railway centre. The main connections between South and East Germany and the direct line from Berlin to Prague and Vienna pass through Dresden whence several branch lines lead to Leipzig and other parts of industrial Saxony* The river harbour is of considerable importance to the freight traffic of the Elbe.
*
To the SW. of the town in the valley of the Weisseritz is the industrial town of Freital (dealt with under its own heading) and a small coal field which supplies the light industries that have been developed in Dresden.
Along the northern bank of the Elbe between Dresden and Meissen are a number of industrial settlements which are outside the municipal area of Dresden. These have been dealt with separately under the town headings Radebeul, Coswig near Dresden, and Meissen.
Transportation Marshalling Yards Friedrichstadt (2) The western quarter of the town, South of the Elbe, is known as the Friedrichstadt. There are large railway marshalling and goods yards with considerable storage facilities. Immediately to the South of these yards and separated from them only by a few streets of houses are two subsidiary goods stations, one of which is used especially for coal traffic.
Railway Repair Shops Friedrichstadt (2) These repair shops, which also include a section concerned with the maintenance of locomotives, are extensive and of great importance. They are adjacent to the marshalling yards and are built along the bank of the small canalised river Weisseritz.
/Railway
156
Railway Repair shops
On the northern bank of the Elbe in the suburb of Pieschen there are locomotive maintenance and repair shops and also smaller marshalling yards and a.goods station between Pieschen and the railway station Dresden-Neustadt.
Inland Harbour Dresden (j) The inland harbour consists mainly of one dock, the Kbnig Albert Hafen approximately 1,200 yards long and 100 yards wide, situated in a tongue of land formed by a bend in the river Elbe in the North West quarter of the city«
Public Utility Services
Power Station Dresden-West Dresden (1) Wettiner Platz •
Dresden-West (Dresdner Gas - Wasser-u.
Elektrizitätswerke A.G.- DREWAG) is the principal power station of the Dresden Corporation and is situated in the Altstadt, South of the Wettinerstrasse Railway station.
It has an installed capacity of 64 MW, It operates on base load, and is supplemented by the A.G. Sächsische Werke (ASW) grid through the substation DresdenrSud, and by the Niederwartha punped­ storage station, 6 miles distant, which can be controlled from this station. A 100 kV circuit connects with theASW grid at Dresden-Shd substation, and cables of 20 kV with the Niederwartha station« The station feeds a district-heating system and a converter station for supply of power to the city tramways« There are 6 turbo-generator sets, two boiler houses, and 4 indoor substations, 3 of which contain transformers, the fourth, the converter station« Local supplies are given at 10 kV 2 kV and lower voltage« Sub-Station Dresden-Säd Niedersedlitz (2) Switching station (DREWAG) connects Dresden-West with the ASW grid and the Niederwartha pumped-storage station by 100 kV cables to those stations« Power Station Johannstadt (j) This subsidiary municipal power station is inCthe Tatzbergstrasse in the eastern quarter of the town« Gas Works Reick (2) The chief municipal gas works (DREWAG) are close to the Bahnhof Reick, a southeast suburb of the town« In 1936, 2,500 million cubic feet of gas were sold and 142,000 tons of coal were carbonized.
/iron
Pieschen (j)
157
Iron, Steel & Ferro-Alloys
Metall Giesserei
Doelzschen (3)
This iron foundry, which employed, some 400 workers in 1943, belongs to the König Friedrich August- Hatte A. G. whose principal activity is the manufacture of machine tools at their Karl Lieberknecht factory in Oberlungwitz.
Aircraft and Aero Engines
M.I.A.G.
Sporbitz (3)
The Seektwerke, belonging to the M.I. A.G. Mühlenbau und Industrie A.G., are situated in Sporbitz, a district in the outlying eastern suburb of Zschachwitz. They were reported in 1943 to be engaged on the repair of aircraft and aero-engiries. They have a metal foundry at Schmiedeberg,, a small town 15 miles South of Dresden.
Flugzeugindustrie Industriegelände
O)
The Sächsische Flugzeugindustrie G. nub.H. is believed to be making and repairing aircraft components for the Miag works at Sporbitz.
Engineering and Armaments
Seidel <fc Naumann Hamburgerstr. (2) The Aktiengesellschaft vormals Seidel & Naumann is an important company which formerly made sewing machines.
They have turned over to armament production (as was also the case with this firm in 1914) and had more than doubled the number of their workers during the four years preceding the war. Even in 1938 they were employing 6,000 workers. They make rifles and machine-guns, pistols, and various small arms components.
Universelle Zwickauerstr. (3) The Universelle Cigarettenmaschinen Fabrik J. & C.
Müller and Co. which formerly made machines for the tobacco industry, is now engaged on armaments and is reported to enqploy several thousand workers. The plant is said to have been greatly enlarged, and shells up to 12 cm. calibre, components for machine guns, automatic rifles, etc. to be among the products.
Clemens Müller A. G. Grossenhainerstr.
(3)
This firm previously made sewing machines and en^loyed 900 workers in 1938. They are now reported to be engaged on the making of arms and arms cooiponents.
Ariston-Elka Chemnitzerstr. (3) Ariston-Elka Maschinenfabrik A.G. are makers of machine tools.
/Gebrüder Bässler
158
Gebrüder Bässler Zwickauers tr. (3) This firm specialises in the manufacture of electric measuring instruments and gauges.
H. Mende
Industriegelände (2)
The firm Radio H. Mende & Co. G.m.b.H. are important makers of radio transmitters and receivers for aircraft and ships.
Sachsenwerk Licht u. Kraft A.G. Niedersedlitz. (2) Apart from the manufacture of motors and generators, this company produces electro-units for locomotives, rotary convertors, transformers, high and low tension switch-gear, arc-welding plant and is reported also to make electric motors for U. boats.
Scamag
Blasewitzerstr. (-)
The Scamag Sächsische Cartonnagen Maschinenfabrik A.G. are makers of all kinds of pressing and forming machines, principally for the manufacture of leather and paper packing and boxes.
Saxoniawerk Trinitatisstr.(J) The Saxoniawerk Paul Heuer K.G. specialise in the manufacture of gear wheels and differentials.
Curt Schoene Rähnitz- (3) Hellerau
Makers of fire fighting equipment and vehicles.
Rähnitz-Hellerau is a small garden city 5 miles North of Dresden.
Schleifscheiben A.G. Lohrmannstr. (1) The Schleifscheibenfabrik Dresden-Reick A.G. are makers of abrasives of all kinds and of grinding machines. In 1939 they employed 800 workers but this factory is believed to have enlarged since 1939 and is now possibly the principal German maker of grinding wheels* Brückner Kanis Industrie- (2) gelände
The Turbinenfabrik B.K. & Co. are specialists in small steam turbines up to 2,00 hp., for use in WS" boats and minesweepers. They were reported in 1942 to be making Lanz steam engines and overhauling "S" boat motors. They have an important research plant for developing high-pressure and high-temperature steam installations, mainly for naval use. Some 700-800 workers are believed to be employed.
Zeiss Ikon A.G. Altenbergerplatz ) Zeiss Ikon A.G. Schandauerstr. ) (1) Zeiss Ikon A.G. Mügelnerstr. (Reick)) The Zeiss Ikon concern has three and probably four important factories in Dresden. The Icawerk at /Schandauerstr
159
Schandauerstr. 72-80 (Alteribergerplatz) specialises in cameras and the Ernemannwerk at Schandauerstr. 48-50 in projection apparatus. The factory at Mügelnerstr. 40 in the suburb Dresden-Re iok has a foundry for non­ ferrous castings and a wood- and metal-working plant.
It is believed to supply tools and consonants required for the other works. It is reported that the factories are now so arranged that the Ernemannwerk assembles all finished articles and that the Icawerk and the Reick plant are equipped for the mass production of consonants.
The optical glass is obtained from Jena but the Ernemannwerk cuts and polishes and is able to turn out the finest quality lenses. *U” boat periscopes and searchlight lenses are among the products of these factories. Machinery and workmen from the main Jena works have been transferred to the Dresden works which expanded their output rapidly in the years preceding the war and now employ several thousand workers. A further new factory for torpedo mechanisms is reported to have been constructed during the war in the Grossenhainerstr to the North West of the city.
Elbe Werke A.G. Mügelnerstr. (3) This firm, which was formerly known as Hermann Haelbig, makes machine tools, particularly grinding machines.
They are associated with the Gebier Werke of Radebeul.
Hille Werke A.G. Otto Mohr Str. (2) Makers of lathes, boring and grinding machines, and other machine tools. This firm expanded rapidly in the years preceding the war and were employing some l,6u0 workers in 1939» They are now reported to be also making A.A. and infantry guns.
Arthur Hecker Ludwig Hartmann Str. (3) The Arthur Hecker Asbest und Gummiwerke are reported, to be making 20;$ of Germany* s requirements of brake and clutch linings, webbing and friction and fibre jointing material, and special lining for propellor shafts. These important producers and the firm of Kirchbach in Coswig bei Dresden, are reported between them to account for more than half the total output of these products.
Postlerit Werke Zschachwitz (-) The Chemische Werke A.G. (Postlerit Werke) are specialists in asbestos and rubber washers and associated products.' Their works, which employed some 200 workers before the war, are in the South East suburb of Zschaohwitz.
Gebrüder Bühler G.m.b.H. Indus triage iKnde (3) This firm has a large works producing machi nery for flour mills and grain silos, and for the sugar, chocolate, chemical and soap industries.
Koch & Sterzel A.G. Zwiokauerstr. (2) This firm increased its activity shortly before the /war
160
war and in 1939 was ©alloying some 2,000 workers« The products are electrical instruments for industrial, technical and medical apparatus« They are also makers of X-ray apparatus.
Anton Seiche A.G. Bamberger str. (3) The previous products of this firm are moulds and metal packings for the chocolate industry.
In peace time they employed approximately 1,000 workers.
J.M. Lehmann Preibergerstr. (3) This firm previously made machinery and apparatus for the chocolate, soap, and dyeing industries. They are now reported to be producing A. A. and field guns.
Klauber A Simen Industriegellnde(3) Klauber A Simon (H. Rasemann and P. G.H. Gaedeke) also known as the Infestowerk, are inportant makers of piston rings and gudgeon pins. They were reported in 1942 to be carrying out large orders for reconditioned motor cars.
Ship Building
Uebigau Werft G.m.b.H. Uebigau (3) The Uebigau Werft G.nub.H. builds river craft, dredgers, tank landing and assault craft and tug-boats. Their yards are on the North bank of the Elbe opposite the Dresden inland harbour.
Chemicals and Explosives
Gehe & Qo. A.G. Leipsigerstr. (J) This firm, which manuf actures pharmaceuticals and drugs, enployed some 700 workers before the war. It has been reported to be producing poison gas.
Serumwerk Zirkus Str. (J) The Sächsisches Serumwerk A.G. has laboratories for the production of all kinds of serums and vaccines. They also make insulin.
lingner Werke A.G. Nossenerstr. (-) This is the parent factory of this concern and makes a wide range of disinfectants and chemical products including the well-known Od d mouthwash.
161
F.H. Pötzsch Z iegelstr. ) Max Elb A.G. T harandterstr.) (-) )
August Leorihardi A.G. Bahnhofst r . ) The above are three of the many smaller chemical factories in Dresden making various pharmaceuticals, varnishes, inks, and cleansing m aterials.
Food Stuffs
•Flour M ills Doelzschen (-) The König Friedrich August Mlihlenwerke A.G. has two large flo u r m ills situ a te d in the two adjoining southern suburbs of Dresden, Doelzschen and Koschlltz.
Hartwig & Vogel A.G. Rosenstr. (-) A large firm making chocolate, cocoa, and coffee­ su b stitu te .
— — -0O0-— —
D U D W E IL E R (Saar) 49° 15* N. 7° E: 350 m iles: (26,000) Dudweiler i s fiv e m iles North East o f Saarbrücken. I ts main a c tiv itie s are oonnected with the important coal mines mentioned below.
Solid Fuels,
Coal Mips Dudweiler (?) The Steinkohlen Bergwerk Dudweiler in 1936 produced 1,600,000 tons of coal. There are 5 pit-heads.
0O07—
162
D U IS B U R G
51° 25* It 6° 45» E: JOO m iles: (437,600) The area covered lie s in the Western extremity of the industrial d istrict of the Ruhr.
I t is traversed from South to North by the Rhine, on the West of which is f la t lightly-wooded country with scattered v illa g e s and small towns, lying at the general le v e l of 75 to 100 fe e t above sea level. On the Bast of the Rhine the country is much more thickly populated and rise s eastwards to about 200 fe e t, except in the gap through which run the River Ruhr and the Rhine-Herne canal. To the North and South are extensive fo rests.
Duisburg i s by far the largest town in th is d is tr ic t with a population of nearly 440,000 (including Hamborn). I t lie s on both sides of the mouth of the river Ruhr and includes the townships of Ruhrort, Hamborn, Wanheimerort, Hückingen, Rheinhausen, Wedau, Grosseribaum and Dinslaken» Duisburg owes it s industrial importance and prosperity to the presence, in it s immediate v ic in ity , of hard coal in very consid­ erable quantities* This has accounted for the development of iron and s te e l, heavy engineering, and other industries and brought about the n ecessity fo r construction and repeated expansion of the Duisburg-Ruhrort Harbour situated at the mouth of the river Ruhr.
Duisburg» s situ ation at the confluences of the rivers Rhine and Ruhr and in the centre of the western concentration of the Ruhr industrial area gives i t great importance from the point of view of transportation. I ts main claim to fame i s that i t i s here more than anywhere else in the Ruhr or Rhineland that the transfer of goods from r a il to water or water to r a il takes place, and i t i s this factor that has made Duisburg the greatest inland waterway harbour in Europe.
The railway network at Duisburg has been constructed primarily to provide ample f a c il i t i e s to deal with the r a il tr a ffic origin­ ating from, or destined for the waterways; th is function is f u lfille d by the extensive marshalling yards at Ruhrort Hafen Neu Schultenhof, which handled about 14 m illion tons of tr a ffic annually before the w ar. A second - and scarcely le s s important - function of the system is to accommodate the North-South and the West-East flow of land traffic; th is is achieved by the marshalling yards at Duisburg main station, and, amongst others, those at Oberhausen West in the North-East (see under "Oberhausen*), at Wedau to the South-East, and at Hohenbudberg on the le f t bank of the river Rhine (see under "Uerdingen").
In addition, Duisburg lie s on the Rhine-Herne Canal, which leaves the Rhine at th is point and Joins the Dortmund-Ems Canal near Datteln and thus links Duisburg by waterway with the North Sea at Bnden and the M ittelland Canal at Bevergern. There are two harbours to deal with the waterborne tr a ffic , which consists in the main of coal, coke, and finished iron and ste e l goods (outwards): iron-ore, grain and timber (inwards); the harbours are ajso important for storage reasons.
There are no particularly important e le c tr ic a l power plants in this area. The Town Power Station has a capacity not exceeding 50 MW and is connected to the main R.W.E* grid system through Brauweiler.
1
163
The Town Gasworks are adjacent to the Power Station* The principal industries are mining» the conversion of ooal into coke, gas and the usual "by-products, iron and steel manufacture, and heavy engineering» The coal and iron and steel industry is almost entirely in the hands of Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G. and its subsidiary companies, the Gelsenkirchener Bergwerke A.G» which operates some of the largest pits and coke ovens, the August Thyssen Öiiite A.G» which operates four great blast furnace plants, the Deutsche Eisenwerk A«G* which is responsible for blast furnaces at Hamborn, the Deutsche Efchrenwerk A*G. and Bandeisenwalzwerke A.G» (which controls the rolling mills at Dinslaken) and the Eisenwerk Wanheim G»m«b«H» These numerous and highly important industrial plants are spread over an extensive area stretching from the South West mainly along the East bank of the Rhine to Dinslaken in the North and extending East to the boundaries with Oberhausen and Mülheim»
Transportation Inland Fort Duisburg-Ruhrort (I) The inland port is the largest in Europe and covers an area of 632 hectares» The harbour forms the intermediary between railways and waterways, its primary activity being the dispatch of a large portion of the output of the Westphalian coal fields« There are numerous ore depots, and the harbour also - handles grain» By its position Duisburg- Ruhrort has become a natural junction for the Lower Rhine and Westphalian railways» The port lies at the mouth of the River Ruhr, which is navigable for large craft to approx­ imately 1 mile above Mülheim, and by smaller barges as far as Witten» The Duisburg-Ruhrort harbour is also the terminus of the Rhine-Herne canal« The volume of goods handled in 1938 amounted to approximately 14,700,000 tons (inwards) and 16,500,000 tons (outwards)» Marshalling lard Wedau (2) The Northern end is about miles South South East of Duisburg station, then the yards extend South South East for a distance of approximately 1| miles, its capacity is estimated at 7,200 wagons per 24 hours» '* Twin locks, 1st set Ruhrort (3) The first set of twin locks on the Rhine-Herne * canal are situated South of Ruhrort harbour Il miles North North East of Duisburg station* Railway Workshops Wedau (3) The Reichsbahnausbesserungswerke are situated 2 miles South South East of Duisburg main station and are engaged on the repair of goods wagons» There were 1,400 workers employed in 1937 but this number is now believed to be con­ siderably higher, possibly 3,000»
164
Railway Junction» Duisburg (3) These Junctions are located about 2 miles North East- of the main station, and include the group of five railway bridges over the Schiff ahrtskanal a further J mile to the North East.
Marshalling yard Duisburg-Hafen Neu Schultenhof (2)
These yards extend 3 miles in length East to West and are situated 2 miles North of Duisburg main station, their capacity is estimated at 5,000 wagons per 24 hours.
Marshalling yard Duisburg main station (3)
The yards have an estimated capacity of 3,600 wagons per 24 hours, and lie to the East of the passenger station and are about 1J miles in length.
Railway Workshops . Hamborn (3) Owned by Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G. the shops are situated 3} miles North North West of Duisburg main station.
Public Utility Services
Pumping station Beeckerwerth (3) Situated 5 miles North West of Duisburg main station, about £ mile from the bank of the Rhine. These works drain 3, 214 hectares on which stand many large and important indus­ trial concerns.
Punping station Sohmidthorst (-) Situated 5 miles North of Duisburg main station, the punping station drains 469 hectares of the surrounding district.
Punping station Schweizern (-) . Situated 5} miles North of Duisburg main railway station and 1J East North East of ' Schmidshorst punping station. These works drain 348 hectares of the surrounding district.
Town power Station Duisburg (3) Situated 1 mile West of Duisburg main station. The Municipal power station has a capacity of 35 MW. The town gasworks adjoin to the south East. Power is also drawn from the R.W.E. 220 kV system via a sub-station on the West bank of the Rhine.
165
Town Gasworks Duisburg (J) 1 mile West of Duisburg main station and immediately South East of the town power station, the Municipal gasworks produced 850 million cubic feet in 1936 and bought a further 6 million cubic feet from the Thyssenssche Gas-und Wasserwerke system» A. Thyssen Butte Power Station Hambom-Alsum (2) This power station is part of, and located in the centre of the August Thy®s e n Hutte steelworks, 4£ miles North West of Duisburg main station» It is of the thermal type and its capacity is believed to be 80 MW., derived from 20 gas-driven generators and 4 steam-turbine driven generators.
Thyssensohe Gas-und Wasserwerke G»m.b.H» Hamborn (2) The works are situated 3j miles North of Duisburg main station» Long distance gas is made for supply to 29 localities and 2 companies, and in addition surplus gas is treated from 4 important coking plants.
The works has an annual gas capacity estim­ ated at 2J9,232,000 cubic metres» Niederrheinische Gas- und Wasserwerke G» m.b.H. Duisburg-Hamborn (3) These gasworks are reported to have sold 167 million feet of gas in 1936, drawn from the Ruhr Gas grid.
Er. Alfred Hutte power station Rheinhausen (3) The power station is situated within the steelworks complex and is owned by Fr.
Krupp A.G. Generating sets include a 35 MW set, and the total capacity is now believed to be 47 MW. (See also under "Iron and Steel". )
Efltte Ruhrort-Meiderich power station Ruhrort-Meiderich (3) The station is situated 2| miles North West of Duisburg main station at the steel-works (see under "Iron and Steel"). There are really two separate stations for A.C. and D.G»,and the capacity is believed to be 32 MW.
Hfttteribetrieb Meiderich power station Meiderich (3) Situated at the steelworks of the same name, 3| miles North of Duisburg main station* The cap­ acity was 21 MW in 1926 and is now believed to be 28 MW. (See also under "Iron and Steel"»)
166
Heinrich Bierwes power station Hückingen (J) The station is owned by Mannesmannrohren- Werke A.G. and supplies the adjoining steel­ works« There are three generators (10, 5 and 1 MW) having a capacity of 16 MW.
Surplus power is delivered to the grid« Kupferhütte power station Hochfeld (3) The power station is situated within the Duisburger Kupferhütte coinpies (see under "Non-ferrous metals" and also under "Chemicals"). Installed capacity was 5 MW but this was increased by a 12 MW generator set in 1938; the present capacity is there­ fore 17 MW.
Thyssen power station Dinslaken (J) This reserve power station is situated at Bandeisenwalzwerke at Dinslaken (see under "Iron and Steel") for which power is normally obtained from the main Thyssen works at Hamborn. Its capacity is believed to be 19 MW.
Solid Fuels
Friederich Alfred Hütte Coking Plant
Rheinhausen (3)
Situated at the steelworks on the Western bank of the Rhine, the coking plant now consists of two batteries with a total of 115 ovens with an annual estimated dry-coal capacity of 540,000 tons. The third battery has been dismantled. The works includes a by-product plant recovering the usual full range of products. Surplus gas is supplied to the Municipality. (See also under "Iron and Steel".)
Neunfihl Coking Plant Hamborn (J) The Gewerkschaft Neumuhl coking plant is located at the Deutsche Kaiser colliery 4i miles North East of Duisburg station. There are 97 ovens with an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 4-60,000 tons. Gas is supplied to the Ruhrgas grid.
167
Bruckhausen Coking plant Hasborn (2) Owned by Gelsenkirchener Bergwerks A.G» the coke-oven plant is situated at Sr.
Thyssen colliery» Pit 3/7 (wee Beecker­ werth Colliery)» 4y wiles North West of Duisburg» There are 345 ovens with an annual estimated dry-coal capacity of 1»870,000 tons» The plant takes power and waste gas from August Thyssen ifiktte» and supplies gas to the Ruhrgas grid.
There is a by-products plant» The plant is reported to employ 400 workers and is the third largest in Germany» Weiderich Coking Plant Hawbora (2) Owned by Gelsenkirchener Bergwerks A.G» » the coke-oven plant is situated at Fr» Ttyesen colliery» Pit 4/8, 3y wiles north of Duisburg main station» There are 386 ovens in 6 batteries with an estimated dry­ coal capacity of 1»720»000 tons» Gas is supplied to the Ruhr gas grid. tiutte Vulkan Coking Plant Duisburg (3) These coke ovens are part of the Vulkan steelworks coupler» and are situated on the Bast bank of the river Rhine about 2 wiles Vest of Duisburg main station» The plant comprises 52 ovens having an annual capacity of 140,000 tons of coal» (See also under "Iron and Steel*») ,
Phoenix-Wes tends/
168
Phoenix-Westende coking plant Ruhrort-Meiderich (3) This coking plant is owned, by Gelsenkirchener Bergwerks A.G. It is situated, to the North of and. immediata|r adjoining the Hhtte Ruhrort- Meiderich steel works and lies 3 ID North West of Duiburg main station.
There are two parts of the plant, J mile apart; the modern plant (Phoenix) originally comprised 58 Collin ovens built in 1925 and JO ovens built in 1921« The 58 ovens were rebuilt by Kqppers in 1939* i mile East of the modern plant lies the old (Rheinstahl) plant originally comprising 130 waste heat ovens, which were converted to regenerative ovens in the ‘20s» These two plants now operate together and the combined annual capacity of dry coal is now estimated at 720,000 tons.
Neumühl Colliery Hambora (3) Owned by Gerwerksohaft Neumtthl the colliery is located 4i miles North East of Duisburg main station» The output of hard coal in 1937 amounted to 1,390,000 tons.
Beeckerwerth Colliery Duisburg-Ruhrort (3) Owned by Gelsenkirchener Bergwerks A.G. the colliery is situated 5 miles North West of Duisburg main station» Combined with Fr» Thyssen Colliezy, pits j/79 the output in 1937 was 1,262,000 tons of hard coal, and 2,000 workers were then employed.
Lohberg Colliery Dinslaken (3) Owned by Gelsenkirchener Bergwerks A.G., the mine is located North East of Dinslaken station» In 1937 the output of hard coal was 1,290,000 tons and there were then 1,800 workers.
Fr. Thyssen Colliery, Pit 2/5 N.W. Hamborn (3) Owned by Gelsenkirchener Bergwerks A.G», the colliery is situated North West of Hamborn near the Emscher canal. In 1937 the colliery produced 1,920,000 tons of hard coal.
Liquid Fuels and Substitutes/
169
Liquid Fuels a nd Substitutes Teerverwertung Weiderich (1) The Gesellschaft fur Teerverwertung m.b.h. plant is situated 3 miles North North West of Duisburg main station, and is reported to process a quarter of tar distilled in Germany. Semi-finished products are collected here and refined, and its pre-war throughput ‘ was 500,000 tons of crude tar per annum. It is also believed that several kinds of carbon electrodes are produced.
Rutgerswerke A.G. Wanheimerort (j) The plant is situated 2J miles South West of Duisburg main station on the corner of Forst Strasse near the Sud-Hafen. Before the war this plant was known to have an annual throughput of about 100,000 tons of tar»
Iron and Steel Friedrich Alfred Hütte Rheinhausen (1+) Owned by Fr.Krupp A.G., the works are situated on the western bank of the Rhine, 3 miles South South West of Duisburg main station, between the river and main Krefeld-Duisburg line. The works includes 10 blast furnaces having an estimated annual capacity of 1,700,000 tons of pig iron and 6 basic Bessemer Converters and 9 open-hearth furnaces having an esti­ mated annual capacity of 1,J00,000 tons of crude steel. The 14 rolling mills are capable of absorbing the whole of the steel output. Finished products cover the usual wide range. The company’s private harbour is nearly j/4 mile in length and their private power station has a capacity of 47 MW. (See under "Public Utilities"). About 12,000 workers are employed. The works were being extended in 1943» August Thyssen Hutte Hambom-Alsun (1+) Owned by the August Thyssen Hütte A.G. group of Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G., the Steelworks are situated 4§- miles north west of Duisburg main • station. There are 8 blast furnaces with an estimated capacity of 1,700,000 tons of pig-iron per annum; and 7 basic Bessemer and 4 open-hearth furnaces, with an estimated annual capacity of 2,000,000 tons of crude steel. Electric steel is also made. The plant has rolling mills capable of absorbing the whole of its steel output; the finished products cover the normal extensive range. Waste blast-furnace gas is supplied, to the adjoining Bruckhausen coking plant (see under "Solid- Fuels"). The company’s private power station
(see/
170
August Thyssen Hütte (Contd) (see under "Public Utilities) is situated in the centre of the works occplex, and the Thyssen pimping station (also under "Public Utilities") is situated 1 mile east of the works. 26,500 workers are ebelieved to be employed.
Sötte Ruhrort-Meiderich Ruhrort-Meiderich (3) Owned by the August Thyssen Hütte A.G-. group cf Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G-. , these works are situated 2j miles north-west of Duisburg main station. There are 8 blast furnaces having an estimated annual capacity of 1 ,000,000 tons of pig-iron; and 10 basic Bessemer converters and 11 open-hearth furnaces with an estimated capacity of 1 ,600,000 tons of crude steel. The rolling mills can absorb the whole of thd steel output and th?hormal range of finished products are manufactured.
For details of the coking plant see "Phoenix- Westende" (under "Solid Fuels"). The works has its own power station (see under "Public Utilities"). Some 10,000 workers are reported to be enployed.
Hutteribetrieb-Meiderich Meiderich (3) Owned by the August Thyssen group of Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G. The steel works are situated 3j miles north of Duisburg main station. There are blast furnaces, with an estimated annual capacity of 500,000 tons of pig-iron.
Special products are ferro-alloys and rollers. The works has its own power station (see under "Public Utilities") 2,300 workers are reported to be employed.
Heinrich Bierwes Hütte Huokipgen (1) Located on the Eastern bank of the Rhine 4? miles south-west of Duisburg main station, these works are owned by Mannesmannrohren Werke A.G. There are 4 blast furnaces with an estimated annual capacity of 750,000 tons of pig-iron; and 4 basic Bessemer converters and 6 open-hearth furnaces having a capacity of approximately 900,000 tons of crude steel per annum.
Electric steel is also produced. The works specialises in tubes for aircraft construction, gun barrels and mine bodies, but the normal range of products is also covered. There are approximately 11,000 workers. The works has its own power station, (see under "Public Utilities").
171
Hatte Vulkan Hochfeld (3) These iron works are situated on the eastern bank, of the Rhine, 2 miles west south-west of Duisburg main station , and are owned by the August Thyssen Hütte A.G. group of Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G. There are J blast furnaces with an estimated annual capacity of 200,000 tons of pig-dron. Ferro-alloys are the firm’s special product. 5,500 hands are reported to be employed.
Niederrheinisohe Hütte Hochfeld-Süd (2) Owned by the August Thyssen Hütte A.G. group of Vereinigte Stahlwerke A. G., the iron and steelworks are situated on the eastern bank of the Rhine 2 miles south west of Riisburg main station. There are 4 blast furnaces with an estimated annual capacity of J00,000 tons of pig-iron , and 7 open hearth furnaces with an estimated annual capacity pf J00,000 tons of crude steel. The rolling mills are capable of handling the whole of ths steel output. The finished products cover the . i normal range. The firm is believed to employ 8,500 workers.
Bandeisenwalzwerke A. G. Dinslaken (1) formerly known as “Werke Thyssen*. This rolling mill plant is now owned by the title firm, a subsidiary of Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G. The works are situated 9 miles North of Duisburg main station and adjoin the railway immediately south east of Dinslaken station.
There is a large continuous strip-rolling mill, one of the only two known to exist in Germany, the other being in the Hoesch steelworks at Dortmund.
In addition to the products of the above mill (strips, tubes, etc.) the works produce steel cylinders, sections, pipe fittings, hoop iron, etc.
The capacity of the cold mills is estimated at 100,000 tons per annum, and that of the hot mills at 200,000 per, annum. There are reported to be 2,500 workers. The works has its own power station (see under “Public Utilities").
172
DOISBÜRG (Contd)
Stahl-und. Walswerke Hückingen (3) Grosseribwum A.G. k J Formerly the Hahnsche Werke A.G. , the works * are now owned by Mannesmeunirohreiw Werke A.G.
They are situated 4 miles south of Duisburg main station on the main railway line to Düsseldorf« There are 5 open-hearth furnaces having an estimated annual capacity of 1$0,000 tons of crude steel per annum« The firm produces equipment for iron and steelworks eto«f and also tubes, in addition to the usual range of products« Non-ferrous Metals
Duisburger Kupferhütte Hochfeld (2) Situated 1-g- miles South West of Duisburg main station, the works are owned by I.G. Farbenindustrie and sometimes referred to by that name« The works are engaged on / copper smelting (but there is no refinery) and leaching of pyrites cinders; • it is estimated to produce 10,000 tons of copper anodes per annum* High-grade 2d.n0 alloys are also produced« The ocnpany also does nickel smelting and formerly treated the Bou Azzer nickel-oobalt ores« The productive = capacity is estimated to be in the region of 1,000 tons of nickel metal per annum« The works has its own power station (see under "Public Utilities")«
Berzelius Wanheim (2) "Berzelius" Metallhfitten G«m.b.H* works are situated on the East bank of the Rhine, 4 miles South South West of Duisburg main station, and the firm is a subsidiary of Metallgesellsdhaft A.G. (Frankfurt a*M«)* The zinc distillation plant has 11 furnaces of 2l6 retorts each; 10 of these furnaces are usually working* Zinc capacity is estimated at 33»000 tons per annum* There is also a re­ distillation plant which had 5 furnaces in 1939 and which then produced 13,000 tons of high-grade zinc* The re-distillation plant was enlarged, possibly to double its size, ia1939« Residues are despatched to the "Berzelius" plant at Braubach - the Biei - und Silberhfttte Braubach G«m«b*H* The plant also produces lead and the current capacity of 5,600 tons per annum is estimated from the 2,500 tons output in 1929« The works also produces silver, tin, and carries out wdbalt- refining and zinc die-casting* 1 »700 workers are reported to be engaged in all the various activities of the works* (see also under "Chemicals")«
175
V.D.M. (Hectanann) Hodhfeld (3) This, the C. Heckmann branch of Vereinigte Deutsche Metallwerke A.G. , is situated. miles South West of Duisburg main station» The works, consisting of brass » ani copper rolling mills, were the third largest producers of rolled copper and copper alloy» There are blast furnaces for treating scrap, slag and residues, and fire refining furnaces for copper with an estimated annual capacity of 30,000 tons» A.G-. fttr Zinkindustrie Hamborn (3) Formerly W. Grillo, this firm are smelters and fabricators of zinc and are situated 3 miles North of Duisburg main station; current metal output is believed to be in the neighbour­ hood of its capacity, namely 6,000 tons. The plant also produces zinc alloys, sends, wire, seamless tubes, zinc white, zinc wire, etc. (See also under "Chemicals and Explosives").
Engineering and Armaments
Demag (Works l) Hochfeld (1) These works lie on the South bank of the Aussen Hafen, 1 mile West of Duisburg main station. Demag are one of the leading manufacturers of rolling mill equipment, • hydraulic forges and presses and hammers, blast- and open-hearth furnaces, converters, electric furnaces; also of mining equipment, excavators, coal cutters, pneumatic tools, conveyors, shaft winding equipment, conpressed air locomotives, pumps, compressors, steam turbines; also gas engines, heavy industrial elevators, cableways and cranes. Armaments such as gun barrels, heavy mountings, and hydraulic equipment for guns are also produced» Demag (forks H ) Duisburg (2) The works are situated on the eastern bank of the Rhine, about i M i e South West of Works I, 1J miles South West of Duisburg main station. The works are producing mainly structural steel, but probably now also many of the items enumerated under Work I (above).
174
Esch Werke Wanheimerort (3) The Esch-Werke Maschinenfabrik und Eisengiesserei K.G. works is situated 1J mile« South South West of Duisburg main station.
The products of the works include rolling-mill equipment, roller beds, manipulators and other steel works equipment; also coal-cleaning and ore dressing plant and other mining equipment.
Kabelwerk Duisburg Wanheimerort (3) Situated 2 miles South West of Duisburg main station on the eastern bank of the river Rhine opposite Friedrich Alfred Hütte. The works produces rubber-insulated cables and other types of cables and explosives.
Eisenwerk Wanheim G.m.b.H. Wahheim (3) Owned by Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G., the works are situated on the east bank of the river Rhins, 3j miles South south west of Duisburg main station.
The products are shell, bomb and grenade cases, crankshafts, etc.
Ewald Beminghaus Hochfeld Situated 1$ miles West of Duisburg main station on the Aussen Hafen, the works is believed to be building ship's boilers.
G. Rubbert Hochfeld (3) Situated just under 1 mile West of Duisburg main station, to the East of E. Berninghaus. The firm makes machine tools particularly lathes and grinding machines.
A. Theisen Duisburg (3) The works of A. Theisen, Fabrikation Gummiisolierter Leitung are located at Kansastrasse, about 400 yards North-East of the main station. It is one of the smaller manufacturers of rubber-insulated cable and wire.
Chemicals and Explosives Chemische Fabrik Curtius A.G. Wanheim (2) Situated 2j miles South West of Duisburg main station, this company has an annual capacity for 10Q^ sulphuric acid of 130,000 tons, which is probably produced by the contact process, and is one of the chief consumers of pyrites.
175
Henkel & Cie« G.m.b.H. Hochfeld (3) Formerly E. Matthes und Weber A.G. The plant is situated 1£ miles West of Duisburg main station, on the Southern sideof the Aussen Hafen« This plant makes the majority of the chemicals consumed by the Henkel company at Dusseldorf-Reisholz and elsewhere in Germany.
There is another branch at Duisburg proper whose products are belived to be some of those listed above,
A.G. fur Zinkindustrie Hamborn (5) Formerly W. Grillo, the plant is situated J miles North of Duisburg main station, and has an annual capacity of 8,500 tons of 100^ sulphuric acid and 7,000 tons of sulphur trioxider (93^ recovert). Previously used the lead chamber process but is now believed to use the contact process. (See also under "Non-ferrous Metals'*).
176
P U L K E N (Rhineland) 51° 15’14 6° 20» E: 280 m iles: (16,000) Apart from a few small te x tile works, Dfolken has no industry of importance« The town is situated six m iles North West of Mftnchen- Gladbach.
D Ü R E N (Rhineland) 50° 50« N. 6° j o ’ E: 290 a lle » ! (46,000) Situated 15 miles East of Aachen, Duren has, in addition to the important works mentioned below, a variety of small industries including paper products and cardboard boxes, several small engin­ eering works, and a sugar factory. I t is a railway centre of some importance to the lower Rhine d is tr ic t.
Transgprtation
Railway Junction Uuren (3) The main lin e from Aachen divides at Duren into three branches leading into Düsseldorf, Cologne and Euskirchen respectively. Two other le s s important branches lead north and south from the town.
Public U tility Services Städtisches Gas Werk Duren (J) In 1936 th is municipal gas works sold 116 m illion cubic fe e t of gas.
Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication Durener Metallwerke Duren (1) Situated in the North East outskirts of the town the ifurener Metallwerke A.G. i s a large works which expanded rapidly in the fiv e years before the war and in 1939 employed more than 4,000 workers in it s works at Uhren, Berlin-Borsigwalde, Berlin-Wittenau and Waren» A wide variety of non-ferrous metal products are made of duralumin, phosphor bronze, and copper a llo y , p articu larly sheet, rectangles, pressed and drawn sections and rods, seamless drawn tubes, rolled and drawn wire, forgings, shaped a r tic le s , e tc . The Durener Metallwerke at Duren is one of the largest works of i t s kind in Germany and i t is believed to produce approximately 7 >000 tons of sheet per year.
177
Carl Canzler
Duren (3)
Thi« firm manufactures apparatus chiefly of non-ferrous metals, for the chemical industry» They produce a special form of patented, copper wire known as OanzlerdrahU
D H B B B R G - K R ^ M MEL
( Schleswig-Holste in)
53° 27’ N. 10° 22’ £: 468 miles: (8,500) The villages of Duneberg and Krumnel lie to the North West and South East respectively of the small town Geesthacht (pop­ ulation 8,500)» Both villages are of industrial importance on account of the two large works of the Dynamit A.-Gw which are situated there.
Chemicals and Explosives Dynamit A»-G» Duneberg (1) This factory is operated by Dynamit A. G., and is quite near the Krummel factory, with which it is associated. In the last war the Duneberg factory was Germany’s largest producer of nitro­ cellulose and nitroglycerine. Most of this production was sent to the Knimmel factory for the manufacture of powder. There has been very little ground information on the activities of this plant during the present war, and there is no air cover. Such reports as have been received Suggest that it has attained at least its former activity, and it is probable that it bears the same relation to the KJÄtamel plant as formerly.
On this basis it may be assumed that the nitro­ cellulose production is upwards of 36,000 tons per annum, but it would be difficult to guess the nitroglycerine or diglyooldinitrate pro­ duction, since it is unlikely that Germany will have concentrated her production of this class of explosive to so great a degree as in the last war, and at least one new factory engaged in this production has been identified.
/Dynamit A.G.
178
Dynamit A.-G. Krummel (1) This factory is operated by Dynamit A.G., and during the last war was the largest propellant powder factory in Germany, accounting for nearly one-third of the total German output of cordite, and also accounting for about 10 per cent, of the total German production of Nitrocellulose.
In the peace years this factory was allowed to continue operations, manufacturing small quantities of nitroglycerine (probably for mining ejqplosives); it also introduced, strangely enough, the production of T.N.T. on a small scale (a little over 1,000 tons a year), and engaged in the production of nitrocellulose for celluloid and synthetic fibre production.
There is very little information regarding the activities of the Krttamel factory in the present war, but it is clear that a very large labour force is now employed. Apart, however, from a report that its nitroglycerine or diglycol dinitrate production approaches 5>000 tons per annum, which is roughly the same as the production in the last war, there is little information as to its output. On the basis of the nitroglycerine or diglycoldinitrate output, it seems likely that this factory has achieved at least its last war importance, and may have considerably exceeded it. This would indicate a nitrocellulose output of about 20,000 tons a year. The factory lies on the banks of the Elbe, east of the village of Geesthacht. There is also probably a large propellant powder plant on this site.
-o0o—
179
DÜSSELDORF (RHINELAND)
51° 15* N* - 6° 50»E 500 miles: (559,000)
The area covered here lies oa both sides of the river Rhine to the south-west of the Ruhr district* It includes the city of Düsseldorf with its main suburbs of Derendorf, Oberbilk and Unterbilk, Liere nfeld and Flingern and the townships of Rath» Ratingen» Gerresheim» Erkrath» Reisholz, Benrath, Nievenheim (including Stürzeiberg) Heerdt (including Niederkassel and Oberkassel) and Lohausen (including Stockum)« The city of Neuss on the western bank of the Rhine is to be found under its own heading and is not included in Düsseldorf« The total popula­ tion for this area is 559»000 (1940)« The city of Düsseldorf has a population of 528»000 (1940) and is the leading coaometcial city of western Germany« Situated on the eastern bank of the Rhine» it has exceptionally good transport facilities both by river and rail« It is furthermore tGermany’s third largest inland port» and therefore of particular importance as a trans­ port centre» During and after the last war» Düsseldorf developed considerably and so far as the production of armaments and general engineering is concerned» it is as important as Essen or Duisburg» In addition Dusseldorf is the seat of the General Administrative Departments of practically all the important iron and steel» heavy engineering, and armament concerns in Rhine and Ruhr districts« »
The distribution of industry ih the Düsseldorf area may be said to lie in 4 main areas:- > > i) The eastern and southern part of the city proper« This is a highly concentrated area containing large engineering works, machine tool makers, wire-drawing plant, and the municipal gas and electricity works« ii) The northern suburb of Derendorf and townships of Rath and Ratingen* Here are to be found extensive marshalling yards and highly important armament manufacturers* iii) The harbour area on the Rhine to the southwest of the city with docks, storage and engineering firms* iv) South of Düsseldorf at Reishols and Benrath* Engineering and chemical works, oil refinery and storage, electricity works, electric resistance wire works, lead and zinc fabricators are all grouped in this area which extends in a south-westerly and north-easterly direction and embraces the townships of Nievenheim and Erkrath*
Transportation* Railway Marshalling Yards. Derendorf (5) These inportant marshalling yards lie to the North­ east of the city approx* one mile north to the main passenger station* These yards have a capacity of 2,100 wagons per 24 hours«
180
R a U w V »idiags. R a t h ( 3 )
North east of the Derendorf marshalling yards, is a large groiq? of railway sidings. No further details are available.
Bahnbrücke. Düsseldorf (-) Directly south of the Dusseldorf harbour is the second of the only two 4-track railway bridges across the Rhine, the other being at Cologne.
Düsseldorf Hafen. Unterbilk (3) This extensive port lies on the southern bank of a bend in the River Rhine 2 miles west of the main railway station. It is mainly a harbour for pieoe goods, having in 1938 large warehouses, 49 electric cranes (capacity between 1.5 and 5 tons and one of 25 tons) and a large loading bridge. 82 shipping and forwarding firms are to be found within the harbour area, also 8 locomotives and 97 goods wagons owned by the harbour railway authority.
The total turnover of Düsseldorf harbour in 1938 was 2,114,000 tons inwards and 954,000 tons outwards.
Reisholskai. Benrath (-) This is a large handling quay with 8 cranes and 1,150 m of quayage. It lies on the northern bank of a bend in the River Rhine approx. 5 miles south-east of the main railway station.
Heerdthafen. Heerdt (-) Situated at the mouth of the Erf t canal on the western bank of the River Rhine approx. 3 miles west of the main railway station, this harbour had, in 19J8 large storage areas and warehouses, J travelling cranes each of 4 ton capacity, one of 5 ton capacity, and 2 each of 5 and 6 ton capacities» 2 port locomotives and 400 m. of quayage.
Public Utility.
Stldtische Elektrisit&tswerke. Flingern (2) The Düsseldorf City Power Station consists of two generating stations sometimes known as Flingern I and Flingern II stations. They are situated on the same site and separated only by the cooson coal storage ground, and by a group of 6 cooling towers.
Of the 9 Turbo generator sets installed before 1938 it is known that 4 are in station I and 5 in Station II. The two most recently installed sets may have replaced two older sets of smaller capacity.
It is believed that a conrextor or rectifier station is attached to station I to simply D.C. to the central part of Düsseldorf.
181
There is a common 5/25 ky A»C* substation for both stations« A.C« siqplies are given at 5 ky and 25 ky* D.C« supplies are given at 600 volts - probably for traction - and at low voltages, for the D«C« net­ work of the central part of the city« It is believed that the station Is connected by 25 ky cables to the Lierenfeld 110 ky substation in the South, and to the Rath 110 kV substation in the North of Düsseldorf« Both of these substations are connected to the 110 ky grid of the R.W.E« company.
There are no long distance supplies« The installed capacity is 118 MW* Bergisches Elektrizitätswerk m«b«& Reisholz« (1) This station operates on base load and supplies are given to the nearby industrial area of Dusseldorf as well as to the high voltage grid of the R.W<E* An oil refinery owned by the Fhenania Ossag- oonpany adjoins the station and a small chemical plant, possibly for hydrogen production, is situated among the station buildings« These two plants are probably large consumers of the electrical output of the station* In 1938 the existing turbo-generator sets had a total capacity of 75 MW« It is believed that there were two or three units with a total capacity of 15 MW and three or four units with a capacity of 15-20 MW each« In 1939 two additional sets each of 20 MW capacity were installed by the A»E«G« The machine house is at present being further extended and it is possible that more generating plant is being installed« (Total installed caapoity 115 MT. )
There is an indoor substation for local supplies which are probably given through medium and low voltage underground cables. Local supplies are given to the adjacent works mentioned above, and to the industrial area of Düsseldorf« There is a 110 IdT outdoor substation in which at least 2 transformers are installed« Two 110 ky lines leave the station. One goes to the Erftwerk (Grevenbroich) aluminium plant of the VAWAG and crosses the Rhine immediately on leaving the station« The other goes to Lierenfeld substation near Düsseldorf« Städtische Gaswerke« Düsseldorf (3) The municipal gasworks lies adjacent to the municipal electricity works* In 1936 the works made 1,900 millioncLuft. and in addition sold (in Benrath only) 65 million cu»ft« bought from Ruhrgas A’G» There is also the RWE gasworks at Reisholz, which
182
draws gas from Ruhrgas. and sold 70 million ou. ft. in 1936.
Liquid Fuels.
Rhenania Ossag Mineralölwerke A.G. Reisholz (2) This benzine re-running plant lies at Reisholz, a S.E. suburb of Düsseldorf. Its annual capacity is believed to be 65,000 tons and it has a storage capacity estimated at JO,000 tons.
Iron & Steel & Ferro-alloys Lierenfeld (2) Deutsche Rohrenwerke A.G. (poensgen) Situated one mile S.E. of the main railway station, this works is believed to have an open-hearth steel plant with 6 large furnaces, which are believed to have a total capacity of 350,000 tens per annum. Tubes of all kinds are its speciality, but universal and heavy plates are also made. The firm has a second tube plant in the suburb of Oberbilk (see under Engineering & krvaainsn.ts') and other works in the Ruhr area. It is owned by Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G.
Note: The steel works of Klöckner A.G., Gebrüder Böhler and Stahlwerk Krieger are listed under “Engineering and Armaments“.
Non-Ferrous Metals/
183
Nonferrous Metals Stollberger Zink A.G-. fftr Bergbau & Zirikfötteribetrieb
miles North (2) of Nievenheim
Thl a works consists of a roasting plant with 11 mechanical ovens; ore sintering plant , distillation plant, with 13 furnaces and 120 retorts each; Rotary furnaces for recovering zinc from zinc dust etc» It also has a clay plant for making retorts and condensers* The capacity of the plant is believed to be 16,000 tons of zinc per annum* The sulphuric acid plant consists of 2 lead ohanfcer units, 4 concentration units and 1 contact unit* The capacity is believed to be 42,500 tons of i 00^ sulphuric acid per year* In 1937 the plant had an output of 34,600 tons of 9 % sulphur trioxide*
E^ineering and Armaments Rheinmetall Borsig A.G. 1) Derendorf 2) Rath
4
1
1) The Derendorf plant of this firm covers an extensive area along the western side of the railway directly north of the Derendorf marshalling yards. It is believed to be engaged on the production of finished guns and shells, aerial bombs, and naval mine components* Also the machining of gun barrels, finished mountings, shields, breech blocks, carriages, cradles, hoists, liners, naval gun turrets, ananunition carts, steel helmets, crankshafts and light metal goods* More than 30,000 workers are believed to be employed*
2) The Rath plant lies approximately 1^ miles East o£the Derendorf plant and approx­ imately 3 miles North East of Dusseldorf main passenger station* It consists of steelworks estimated to be producing 160,000 tons of special steel per anxmm and an engineering section producing gun-barrel forgings, armour plate for tanks, tool steel, drop forgings, turbine rotors, reinforcement iron, aluminium alloy forgings and wire etc. This plant is one of Germany’s principal consumers of ferro-alloys* Workers are estimated to number some 6-7,000.
Mannesmannrohren-Werke A.G-./
184
MannesmannrohrejvWerke A.G. Rath (1) Situated 3s miles North of the main railway station, this extensive plant produces iron and steel tubes, chrccdum-molybderum tubes, submarine mine oases, tank mine oases, shells, bcmbs, welded holler drums, high pressure cylinders for submarines, etc., and inoediary bombs. 24,000 workers are believed to be enployed.
Schiess A.G. 1) Oberbilk ) (vonnals Schiess Defries A.G. ) 2) Heerdt (3) 1) This works lies along the railway directly North East of the main station. It is a leading German producer of machine tools, copper alloys, magnetic mines, ordinary steel mine bodies, bombs and shells of the heaviest calibre, and. bomb and shell compon­ ents. In 1937 approximately 2,200 workers were employed at the Oberbilk factory mainly on machine tool manufacture. It is believed that in 1940 some 3 >500 workers were engaged on machine tools and a further 3,500 on bombs, shells and mines. According to ground intelligence a further increase in the number of workers took place after 1940* 2) The second works of Schiess A.G. lies at Heerdt on the Western bank of the river Rhine.
It is believed to be engaged on components supplied to the main plant in Dusseldorf proper.
Stahlwerk Krieger Oberkassel (3) Controlled by the Ruhrstahl A.G. group of Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G. this works is situated in the suburb of Oberkassel on the Western bank of the river Rhine approximately 3i miles North-West of Dusseldorf main station.
The engineering section of the plant special­ ises in castings, rolling-mill equipment and drop forgings. The steel plant (open hearth and electric steel) has an estimated annual capacity of 80,000 tons of crude steel. Some 1,800 workers are believed to have been employed in 1943»
Gutehoffnungshütte Oberhausen A.G./
185
Gutehoffnungshutte Oberhausen A. G. Flingern (1) This plant lies, approximately 1^ miles North- North-East of the main railway station. It is mainly composed of . engineering sections spenjAli sing in electric steel castings, forgings, wheels,and tubes, and is believed to have a considerable output of heavy bomb oasings. The steel section of the plant has an estimated annual capacity of 100,000 tons of crude steel. It has been reported that in 1943 nearly 20,000 workers were employed at this works which also includes a number of departments operating on behalf of the G.H.H. subsidiary company, Schloemann A.G. These departments are believed to be mainly engaged on the manufacture of hydraulic presses, and rolling mill equipment which are sold under the Qame of Schloemann.
Klockner A. G. Oberbilk (2) The Düsseldorf branch of this Duisburg firm lies approximately J mile East of the main railway station. The plant canprises an open-hearth steel-works with 4 fifty-ton furnaces, a cold-rolling mill, and wire­ drawing plant. It is estimated that 100,000 tons of crude steel are produced annually and every type of wire, including rope, net, and barbed wire, is manufactured. This works is one of the leading wire-drawing plants in Germany.
Gebrüder Bühler & Co., A. G. Büderich-Heerdt (1) The extensive works belonging to this firm are situated approximately 4 mil es North- West of Düsseldorf main station on the Western bank of the river Rhine. They are reported to be engaged in the production of alloy-steels for all purposes, spring steel, magnets, crankshaft forgings for aero-engines, and heavy shell. Some 4,000 workers are believed to be employed.
Haniel & Dueg G.m.b.H. Flingem (?) This firm occupies part of the site of the Gutehoffnungshutte Oberhausen A.G. It is believed to be engaged on the production of mining machinery, oil borers etc. 1,000 workers were employed in 1940.
Demag A.G./
186
D«aag A.Ge Benrath (J) The Benrath works of Demag are situated along the Eastern side of the main ifusseldorf- Opladen railway line approximately 1 «51* from the river Rhine. The manufacturing programme of these works includes the mano* facture of slewing cranes, overhead travelling and giant cranes, loading bridges, excavators, and standard steam cranes* Also special factories for structural steelwork, steel buildings and bridge building.
Press u*Walzwerk A.G* Reisholz (J) Situated about 4 miles South East of Dusseldorf main station, this firm is engaged on the pro­ duction of pressed and rolled steel goods, boiler bodies, railway materials and shell* It has 3 basic steel furnaces with an estimated annual capacity of 50,000 tons* JUG* der Oberbilker Stahlwerke Oberbilk (3) In 1923, this firm was leased to the Press u* Walzwerk A*G*, Reisholz, and it is believed that it is engaged on production similar to that mentioned above* The works cover a fairly extensive areq4djacent to the east side of Dusseldorf main railway station* Düsseldorfer Waggon-Fabrik Lierenfeld (3) This plant lies 1J miles due East of the — in railway station* It produces tractors, trailers, and about 2,000 railway wagons per annum* In 1938» some 700 workers were employed*
Hein, Lehmann & Oo*,A*G* Oberbilk (3) This is a firm of constructional engineers believed to be employing 1,600 workers* Constructional steel, railway sleepers, lines and cranes etc*, are produced* The works lie approximately J mile South East of the main passenger station, adjacent to the Lierenfeld goods station* Deutsche Carborundum Werke G*m*b*H» Benrath (R) lying miles South East of Dusseldorf, this firm produces silicon carbide, grinding wheels and abrasives* It is believed that this firm ranks fifth in importance among the German manufacturers of grinding wheels* It probably accounts for the bulk of its own requirements of silicon carbide*
Schenk u* Liebe-Harkort A.G./
187
Schenk u. Liebe-Harkort A.G. Heerdt (3) Situated in the suburb of Heerdt approximately 3 miles North West of Dusseldorf main station on the West bank of the river Rhine, this firm manufactures blast-furnace and equipment, such as automatic charging plant, cranes, electric cranes, presses and wire-working machinery etc# 600 workers are believed to be employed.
J.G»Schwietske Metallwerke Rath (2) This firm, 3 miles North of the main railway station, is engaged on the production of centrifugal castings, torpedo tubes, and other toxpedo components.
Deutsche Delta Metallwerk A.G.
JUDiok A Co., Flingern (3) Approximately 1J miles Nörth East of Dusseldorf, this works has brass rolling mills and is engaged on the production of sheets, bands, profiles, rods, pipes, wires, drop forgings, forged parts, etc.
Malmedie A Co*, Lierenfeld (3) lying 1| miles East of Düsseldorf main station, this firm manufactures wire-working machines.
Fischer A.G*f^r Blechverarbeitung Düsseldorf (3) Manufacturers of steel sheet products, this firm employs some 400 workers.
Elektrometall Sohniewindt, Pose u*Mhrre Erkrath (3) This firm is one of the leading German producers of electric resistance wire and nickel chromium wire.
Dürrwerke A.G. Ratingen (2) Brior to the war this factoxy enployed 800 workers on the manufacture of boilers and associated products. According to uncon­ firmed ground reports the faotory was en­ larged in 1943 and converted to make heavy tanks. The reports suggest that several thousand workers were employed in 1943.
It is known that the plant was fully active from 1938 on and that it was chiefly engaged on Government contracts.
Jagenberg Werke A.G./
188
Jageriberg Werke A.G. Oberbilk (j) This works lies miles South of the main station and is engaged on the production of paper-working machines. 1,250 workers were employed in 1940.
Oalor-Emag Elektrizitlts A.G. Ratingen (j) This firm is situated in the outlying suburb of Ratingen just North of a group of railway sidings. It is a manufacturer of insulators, switch gear, dynamos, and electric motors.
Wotan & Zimnermann-Werke A.G. Dusseldorf (J) This firm employs 500 workers on the production of welding, grinding, and planing machines.
Vereinigte Kesselwerke A. G. Dusseldorf (3) Covering an area of 13,000 square metres on a site 24,000 square metres, this firm manu­ factures boilers and constructional machinery. 700 workers are reported to be employed.
Rheinische Metallwarenfabrik A.G. Dusseldorf (3) Steel for projectiles and forged parts for motors and aircraft are produced by this firm.
Maschinenfabrik Rheinland A.G. (V.K.P.) Dusseldorf (3)
।
This firm was engaged on the production of ball bearing axles for road vehicles, but is believed to have been closed since 192% Gebj^der Loewe Dusseldorf (3) Accessories for machine tools including lathe heads and spindles are produced by this firm.
Paul Forkhardt K.G. Dusseldorf (3) In 1939 some 550 workers were employed by this firm on the production of machine tools.
Dr.ing.Restotz Lohausen (-) This factory makes foundry plant - mainly cupolas.
Hasenolever Maschinenfabrik A.G» Dusseldorf (-) Manufacturers of cableways, conveyors, wagon dischargers, rail laying machines. in 1938 they employed 300 workers.
A. E hrenreich & C ie ./
189
JUEhrenroioh 4 Cie Heerdt-Oberkaeeel (5) Situated in the suburb of Oberkaasel on the Western bank of the river Rhine, this works manufactures propeller shafts» and universal Joints«
Habersang & Zinsen G«m«b«H» Oberbilk (-) Employing JOO workers, this works produces machine tools« Deutsche Drahtwalzwerk A«G» Dusseldorf (-) This firm is a subsidiary of Mannesmannrohren- Werke A«G»> and is engaged on the production of steel wire«
Sensseribrenner G«nub«H» Oberkassel (3) Situated near the Western bank of the river Rhine, this firm manufactures casting machines, ladles, and ladle cars; also steel furnace and equipment«
Walzmasohinenfabrik August Schmitz G«m.b«H« Unterbilk (3) These manufacturers of rolling mills and their equipment, are situated if miles South» West of the main railway station« Westdeutsche Werkzeugmaschinen JUG* Benrath (3) This factory makes electric welding apparatus and machine tools« Gustav Zimmermann Maschinenfabrik G»m«b«B» Rath (3) Situated in the Northern suburb of Rath, this firm is engaged on the production of foundry moulding machines« Trebelwerk 1« Lambert G«m»b.H. Rath (3) This small works specialises in the manu­ facture of grinding wheels« L.Soest & Co«, Reisholz (3) Situated Jf miles South East of the main station, this works is engaged on the pro­ duction of heavy tool-making machines, machine tools, and is reported to employ some 650 workers« It was taken over by Schiess A«G« in 1938«
Rohde & Dörrenburg/
190
Rohde & ÖSrrenburg DÜseeldorf (3) Manufacturers of twist drills, reamers, milling cutters, and twist drill grinders.
Hiller & jßller Nickel-Fabrik JUG. ifcsseldorf (-) Fabricators and rolled nickel for anodes, sheets, rods, bars,and tubing» No detail a of the capacity are available» Maschinenfabrik Sack G»m.b»H» Hatingen (•) Engaged on the production of rolling mill equipment.
Chemicals and Explosives/
191
Chemicals and. Explosives Henkel & Cie
Reisholz (3)
Situated. 3j miles South East of Dusseldorf main station, the chemical works of Henkel & Cie (incorporating Henkel G.m.b.H. on the same site) are the largest manufacturers of soap and the second largest producers of sodium perborate, and glycerine, in Germany« In May 1943, this plant was reported to be employing more than 3,000 workres* Thompson-Werke G.m.b.H. Oberbilk (3) Manufacturers of soap powder and miscellaneous chemicals. Plant lies exactly 1 mile East of main railway station.
Rutgerswerke A.G. miles north (3) of Nievenheim
This is one of the largest wood impregnating plants in Germany.
Pahlsche Gummi u. Asbest-Gesellschaft Rath (3) ”Pagnagw m.b.H.
Fibre and asbestos joinings, sheets, hose (reinforced), particularly rubber lined asbestos products, and possibly fuel tanks are manufactured. Well-equipped modern factory employing 4-500 workers before the war.
Düsseldorfer Gummiwerk Theiler and Seeberger G.m.b.H. Heerdt (3) This firm employed 400-500 workers in 1938 -when they were principally engaged in producing rubber soles and heels reputedly at the rate of between 50 and 60 tons per month.
Erwin Pfeffer Düsseldorf (3) This company is a government-licensed re-treating concern with capacity to process 1,000 motor tyres per month.
Rheinmühle A.G. Benrath (-) This plant consists of flour mills, grain storage, cold storage installations. Milling capacity is 12,000 tons per annum and the total storage capacity is believed to be 1 million cubic feet.
Simons Mühle Hafenbecken I (-) Düsseldorf This plant consists of a flour mill and grain silos.
Rheinmühle Hafenbecken II (-) Düsseldorf
Rheinmühle consists of flour mill and silos.
192
Simons MtSile Hafenbecken I Düsseldorf This plant consists of a flour m ill and grain s ilo s .
Bheinmtihle Hafenbecken II Düsseldorf Rheinmühle consists of flour m ill and silo s.
193
E B B R S W A L D E (Brandenburg) 52° 50* N» 13° 50’ E: $00 miles; (39,000) Eberswalde is situated on the railway lin e from S tettin to Frankfurt (Oder) I t is important as a connecting link between Berlin and S tettin owing to it s location on the Hohenzollem Car ZL.
This oanal leaves the Havel at Oranienburg and flows past the northern d istr ic ts of Eberswalde to join the Oder at Niederfinow» A large sh ip -liftin g lock connects the lev els of the canal and the Oder. The town is ch iefly important for it s large brass and copper works.
There are also engineering plants, ra iiv -y repair shops, and a chemical factory.
Transportation Reichsbahnausbesserungswerke Eberswalde ( J) These large railway repair shops are in the West part of the town and are believed to employ some 2,000 workers on the repair and maintenance ' of passenger and goods wagons.
S h ip liftin g Lock Niederfinow (2) Situated some 3 miles East of the -town th is lock was the f ir s t of i t s kind to be b u ilt.
The process of liftin g ships bodily from one lev el to another dispenses with several locks and shortens the time required for the change of le v e l, by about six hours. This lock can accommodate vessels up to 1,000 G.R.T. and is believed to be the largest of i t s kind in the world.
Public U tility Services Märkisches Elektrizitätswerk A.G. Finow (1) The in stalled capacity of th is thermal power station is believed to be 66 MW. Th? 100 kV substation is a focal point for the 100 kV transmission lin es which run from the B erlin area to Northern Germany. Two 100 kV long distance lin es run to Gustrow via Liebenwalde, one to Pasewalk, West of S te ttin , and one to Strausberg, East of B erlin. One lin e , probably 50 kV runs to 'Angermunde.
Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication Hirsch-Kupfer A Messingwerke A. G»; Finow (1) These are one of the largest producers in Germany of rolled copper and brass and other copper alloy products. They also produce aluminium sheet, rectangles, d isc s, section s, rods, tubes and wire on a large scale and are believed to employ several thousand workers.
194
Engineering and Armaments Ardelt Werke G.m.b.H. Eberswalde (2) This firm is reported to employ some 3,000 workers on the manufacture of light-metal castings and steel castings for aircraft construction as well as gear boxes for use in tanks and other military transport, lifting and conveying appliances, cranes,etc» Franz Seiffert A.G. Eberswalde (3) The main factory of this company is situated at Eberswalde on the Hohenzollern Canal and there is a branch works at Bochum. At Eberswalde some 1,200 workers were employed in 1940 on the manufacture of high-pressure tubes.
Chemicals and Explosives Schering A.G. Finow (3; Situated on the Hohenzollern Canal at Finow this is a branch factory of Schering A.G.
Berlin. It is one of the only two synthetic- camphor factories in Germany, the other being the Rheinische Kampfer G. m.b.H. at Dusseldorf which is also owned by Schering. Other products of this works are agricultural insect­ icides, borax and boric acid and formic acid.
Textiles and Paper
Paper Factory - Siemens Finow- Wolf swinkel ( 3)
A large factory, owned by Siemens-Schuckertwerke A.G» It produces paper both for electrical and general purposes, and it occupies an area of 146,600 sq.ft, and is situated some 3 miles East of Eberswalde.
Rubber
Rubber Factory - Hochwald Eberswalde (3) Autoreifen-Hochwald, are a Government licenced retreading firm with capacity to treat 1,200 car and truck tyres per month.
0O0—
195
E B I N G E N (Wurttemberg) ^5* JJ. 9° E: 470 miles (25 >000) Situated some 15 miles Northwest of Lake Constance, Ebingen’ s chief importance lie s in i t s engineering and te x tile works. Owing to industrial expansion, the town’ s population is said to have increased during the past three years by more than 5,000. Apart from those mentioned below, Ebingen contains a nunfcer of smaller factories but none of these is of individual importance.
Engineering and Armaments Gottlieb Guhring Ebingen (j) This firm is reported to employ some 800 workers and to manufacture a ll types of boring and some other machine tools.
Mauser Werke A.G. Ebingen (2) This is a branch factory of the well-known Mauser Werke A.G. of Oberndorf. I t is believed to specialise in the production of r ifle s and machine guns and is reported to employ some 4,000 workers.
Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper Schwäbische Z e llsto ff Ebingen (3/ This firm produces woodpulp and viscose staple fib re. The output of staple fib re is believed to be 10,000 tons per annum. ,
— -------0 O 0 - - -------
E H R A N G (Rhine province) 49° 50’ N. 6° 50 E: 320 miles: (4.800) Ehrang is a small town situated near the le ft bank of the River Mosel some six miles north of Trier. I t is an important railway junction - the main lin e running north-south from Cologne to Saar­ brücken crosses the line running northeast-southwest from Koblenz to Luxembourg - and i t is a v ita l centre for the carriage of goods between the Rheinland and France. The important marshal 1 ing yard and the KlBcknerwerke branch foundries at Quink are referred to below»
Transportation
Marshalling yard Ehrang (2) The marshalling yard is situated south of the railway junction. I t had a capacity of 4,000 wagons per 24 hours in 1938,and included a depot for 76 locomotives with 3 turntables, and large storage and reception sidings. The yard is one of the main sorting places for French and Lorraine iron ores and other raw materials in tran sit to the Ruhr and one of the v ita l yards for the carriage of industrial material between France and the Rhineland.
196
Iron and Steel Werk Quink of Klockner Ehrang ( j.
The highly important firm of Klockner-Werke A.G., whose headquarters are in Duisburg,fcave a branch works at Quink, a small village 1 mile north of Ehrang. The works comprise an iron foundry, enamel works, a light-metal foundry, nickel plating plant, and a brick works» There is also a plant which special­ ises in the manufacture of furnaces.
----- 0O0--— —
E I L E N B U R G (Saxony) 51° 30' N. 12° 40* E: 550 miles; (20,000) Eilenburg is situated on the river Mulde some 15 miles north east of Leipzig. The principal industry of this small town is celluloid and celluloid products. There are two main factories, listed below, both of which are owned by the I.G.concern and are now reported to be engaged on the manufacture of explosives.
Transportation Reichsbahnausbesserungswerke ( Eilenburg (j) These railway repair shops are engaged on the repair and maintenance of goods wagons.
Chemicals and Explosives Deutsche Celluloid A.G. Z iegelstr. (j) Prior to the war this factory employed some 800 workers on the manufacture of fire-proof celluloid goods, end photographic film s.
Intelligence reports suggest that parts of the factory have been converted and are now making explosives on a considerable scale.
I.G.Farbenindustrie Eilenburg (j) Formerly known as the Deutsche Cellulose Fabrik, this branch of I.G.Farbenindustrie specialises in the manufacture of cellulose, gun cotton, and nitro-cellulose-film . Some 1,500 workers are employed here and their monthly output of nitro­ cellulose is believed to be approximately 1,300 tons.
----- 0O0-----
197
E I S E N A C H (Thuringia) 10® 20* N: 455 miles (50,000) Eisenach is on the main line from Berlin to Frankfort/Main.
It has a considerable industry including the important aero-engine and M.T.works of B.M.W. mentioned below. The industrial quarter is mainly grouped in that part of the town which lie s North of the railway.
Transportation Marshalling Yard Eisenach South East (j)
On the Eastern side of the railway station there are marshalling yards, a goods station and a small railway repair shop.
Aircraft and Aero Engines Bayerische Motorenwerke A.G. Eisenach (1) This firm has its parent works at Munich and the Eisenach works was formerly known as the Dixi-Werke, makers of small automobiles, delivery cars,and other transport.
After the acquisition of the Dixi company by B.M.W* a considerable expansion of the works was undertaken and a subsidiary factory opened at Stockhausen near Eisenach. It is believed that a third factory, built just to the North East of Eisenach since 1940, is also owned by B.M.W* Ground reports suggest that the new plant is exclusively engaged on the manufacture of military transport, including A.F.V*s, and is supplied with components by the Stockhausen works. The latter is believed to supply components also to the main Eisenach works, the chief a ctiv ities of which are the manufacture of aero-engines, engines for military transport, gears and gear-boxes, and a small range of engine components which are believed to be supplied to other B.M.W. works. It is believed that the Eisenach group of B.M.W. plants together employ son» 7,000 workers.
Engineering and Armaments Gebrüder Demmer Eisenach (3) These works are situated South of the main B.M.W. plant and are believed to produce mine cases, sh ells, mines and components for mines.
———o0o— —
198
E I S E N B E R G (Thuringia) 50° 58» N> 18° 54* B: 520 miles: (11,000) Eisenberger Trockenplattenfabrik Eisenberg (j) The Eisenberger Trockenplattenfäbrik Otto Kirschen A.G, is one of a small number of German firms making photographic plates and films« ------- oOo------- E I S ER F ELD (Westphalia) See under Siegen« E I S L E B E N (Saxony) 51° 30» N* 11° 30» E: 500 miles: (24,000) Eisleben which is 20 miles West of Halle, is the centre of an important copper-mining d istr ict, Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication Mansfeld A.G, Eislebei^ Mansfeld (1)
The Eislebex04ansfeld area is by far the most important concentration of copper production in Germany. It is believed that with the installation of new equipment and plant, the productive capacity of the Eisleber/Mansfeld plants had by the outbreak of war been stepped up to as much as JO,000 ions of copper per annum out of a total German production of new copper of JJ,500 tons per annum.
The Eislebei04ansfeld production is dis­ tributed over tne following works, the individual output of which is not knowni- a) Mansfeldsoher Kupferschiefer Bergbau A.G, at Mansfeld near Eisleben, b) Kur-Hessische Kupferbergbau G,m«b,H* Hosel near Mansfeld, o) Studiengesellschaft Deutscher Kupfer­ bergbau G.m,b,H, at Liedersdorf and Sotterhausen near Mansfeld, The Mansfeld company operates two mines at Eisleben and others nearby are at Krughütte and Clothildenschacht• The company has a smelting plant at Eisleben and a smelting plant and refineries at Hettstedt with a total capacity of 30,000 tons per annum of which 25,000 tons is electrolytic refining and 5,000 tons fir e refining. The smelting plant at Eisleben treats only ores produced from the Mansfeld mines and has no provision for refining.
The smelters and refineries at Hettstedt treat the b lister copper from Eisleben, co;pper ores and mattes from Mansfeld, Liedersdorf, and Hasel as well as copper scrap.
The Mansfeld plants at Eisleben and Hettstedt fabricate virtually the whole production of the Mänsfeld refineries. They have an output of approx­ imately 25,000 tons per annum of copper sheet and wire, the "bulk being in the form of copper sheet.
199
E L B I N G (East Prussia)
52,0 io* N« 19° 25* E: 8J5 miles: (81,000)
Elbing is an important B altic port where the Schichau ship-building concern have extensive yards» It is on the main railway lines ^om Berlin and S tettin to Königsberg, Riga and the Eastern front. The town has an important engineering and shipbuilding industry and has gained considerably in industrial importance since 1939 owing to its large submarine building yards.
Public U tility Services Power Station Elbing North (2) This is a thermal station supplying the town and dock areas and has a capacity of 48 MW.
It was built in 1927/8 for ultimate capacity of 50 MW. One generating set of 24 W was installed in 1937 to supplement the three origin ally installed sets totallin g 24 W .
Aircraft and Aero Engines Wittowsky G.m.b.H. Elbing North (3) This firm is believed to specialise in the manufacture of ply-wood components and sections for a ircra ft.
Ship Building F.Schiohau G.m.b.H. Elbing North (1) These highly important ship yards specialise in the building of submarines, torpedo boats, and destroyers of the Elbing class. They lie to the North of the town on the banks of the Elbing river. The site of the yards includes a small electric power plant and foundries.
The la tter also serve the locomotive and engineer­ ing worses mentibned below»
Engineering and Armaments F.Schichau G.m.b.H. Elbing South East (2j
In the South East quarter of the town the Schichau concern has a large works chiefly engaged on the manufacture of locomotives. Other products include general machinery, boilers and steel bridges.
Bussing-N.A.G* Elbing South (2) These works which formerly belonged to the Maschinenfabrik Koranick G.m.b.H., produce heavy lorries and other types of military transport on a large scale.
200
E L M S H O R N (Schleswig—Holstein) 53° 45» 9° AO* 2: 440 miles: (18,000) Elmshorn i s a junction on the railway from Hamburg to K iel and Esbjerg. I ts ch ief industries are leather tanning, engineering te x tile s and fo o d -stu ffs, but none of the fa cto ries are of indi-rid- ual importance.
E L B E R F E L D
See under WUPPERTAL E L S N I G
See under Torgau. — —o 0 ö ~ —
E M D E N (Hanover) 50° 20* N. 7° 10» E: 3A0 miles: (35,000) Emden, situated on the right bank of the Ems estuary opposite the Dutch coast, is the most westerly of the German North Sea ports and the nearest to England. The surrounding country is f la t , and low-lying, intersected by canals and almost en tirely devoted to agri­ culture. Apart from it s harbour and associated industry, Emden and the surrounding d is tr ic t is not in d u stria lly sig n ific a n t. I t s position, however, as a terminus of the Dortmund-Ems Canal and the Ems- Jade Canal connecting Emden with Wilhelmshaven makes i t a valuable service port for the Ruhr, p articularly in the handling of Swedish iron ore for which i t i s sp ecia lly equipped. I t is also important as a naval station , a base for mine-layers and mine-sweepers, and for its f a c ilit ie s fo r shipbuilding and ship rep airs.
There are four main harbours, the Outer Harbour, the inner Harbour, the New Inner Harbour, and the Industry Harbour. Of these, only the Outer Harbour is tid a l, the others being entered from the sea, either via the lock at the entrance to the New Inner Harbour, or through that at the northern end of the Outer Harbour. The Outer Harbour is capable of accommodating the largest sea-going vessels at i t s quays.
The New Inner Harbour, in which is handled a large proportion of Emden» s tr a ffic , is reached by the large ocean lock (260 m. long by 40 m. wide). On the south of th is harbour is the Ore and Iron Quay; ooal and coke are also dealt with at th is quay.
Adjacent to the New Inner Harbour on the north is the Industry Harbour with the Nordseewerke shipyard and a briquette factory.
The harbour equipment includes a great variety of cranes, and good railway connections to the quays enable loading to be effected direct iron truck to ship without the need of intermediate storage.
Emden is supplied with e le c tr ic ity on the grid system. A grid ®®d transformer station is situated at the eastern extremity of the Industzy Harbour. A small power plant on the east quay of the Inner Harbour, at i t s southern end, supplies power for dock in s ta ll­ ations.
Emden has no important local industries. I ts value lie s rather in its trade, which causes fhe port to rank high among German seaports.
It is the import and export harbour for bulk goods to and from the eastern and central Ruhr, notably serving th is d istr ic t with supplies
201
of iron ore from Sweden» There i s also an active trade in agri­ cultural produce, c a ttle , timber, coal and coke, while i t was in peace time an important base for the deep sea fish in g f le e t . On the east quay of the Outer Harbour are large grain warehouses and a s ilo . Submarines and small surface craft are constructed at the Nordseewerke.
Transportation s Port Area Emden South (2) Emden has four main harbours. These are the Aussen-Hafen, Binnen-Hafen, Neuer-B innen- Haffen, and Industrie-Hafen. A new submarine harbour has been constructed on the south side of the Industrie-Hafen. The only harbour d irectly accessible from the sea is the Aussen-Hafen, the remainder being reached by means of locks. The largest of these is the Ocean Lock at the entrance to the Neuer-Binnen-Hafen which is 260 metres long by 40 metres wide. Iron ore, coal and coke, are dealt with at the quays situated on the South side Of th is harbour. The Dortmund-Ems and Ems- Jade Canals terminate in the Eastern quarter of the town and are connected by a third canal known as the Verbindungs-Kanal.
Marshalling Yards . Emden South (j) The marshalling and goods yards lie to the North of the main railway station .
Ship Building Nordseewerke G.m.b.H. Emden (2) This is an important ship building yard belonging to the Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G. of Dusseldorf.
There are four slipways capable of building large ocean-going v e sse ls, and a floatin g dock of 5,000 tons capacity. Up to six submarines have been reported as under construction in these yards simultaneously. Naval au xiliaries and freighters are also b u ilt here.
E M M E N D IN G E N (Baden) 4ß° 10» N. 7° 50» Es 425 miles: (15,000) Emmendingen lie s on the railway from Basle to Karlsruhe. Its industries include machine, leather and cigar fa c to ries, but apart from the one plant lis te d below, none of these is of individual importance.
Engineering and Armaments Wehrle Werke A.G. Bismarkstr. (3) This factory formerly manufactured machinery and appliances for breweries. It is now reported to have in stalled a number of machine tools and to be making tank and submarine com­ ponents.
— —oOo— —
202
’ E M M E R IC H (Rhineland) 51° 50» N» 6° 51’ Ä: 275 « lie s: (17,000) Emmerich, situated on the right bank of the Rhine, lie s on the railway from Western Germany to Holland and is w ell known as a Customs station for Rhine riv er tra ffic» I t s only fa c to r ie s, apart from those lis te d below, are a small number of wine and s p ir it d is t ille r ie s and a few small engineering plants» Liquid Fuels and Substitutes Deutsche Gasolin A.G» Emmerich (2) This o i l refin ery has d is t illa t io n f a c il i t i e s and a cracking plant. The annual capacity is .•> believed to be approximately 60,000 tons» In 1940 the plant was severely damaged by the R.A.F. but is believed to have been fu lly active again in July 1943« The Deutsche Gasolin A.G» has another refinery at Dollbergen, near Peine, and in 19J8 some 2,000 workers were employed in the two works»
Food-Stuffs Oelwerke Germania G •m.b.H» Emmerich (-) This vegetable o il hardening plant i s reported to have closed down in 1943«
E M S D E T T E N (Westphalia) 52° 10» N. 7° 40» 1: 335 miles: (18,000) Emsdetten, on the river Ems, lie s some IO miles West of Osnabrück. Apart from a small te x tile industry ch iefly engaged in jute spinning, i t contains no industries of importance. ---»--cOo»——« E R F U R T (Saxony) 51° N. 11° E: 485 miles: (148,000) Erfurt lie s on the railway lin e s from B erlin to Fraakfort/Main •öd Berlin to Schweinfurt and wSrsburg. I t i s ch iefly noted for i t s boot and shoe industry but there are a number of w ell known engin­ eering, plants sp ecialisin g in the manufacture of small arms.
Transportation Railway Marshalling lards Erfurt (3) These marshalling yards are situated to the east of the town and in 1939 had a capacity of 2,600 wagons per 24 hours.
203
Public Utility Services Städtische Elektrizitlts-Werke Hadcwitzstr. (2)
The principal-power station is situated to the South of the main railway station. It has a capacity of 44 MW.
Aircraft and Aero Engine« Flugzeugreparatur Werk Erfurt Erfurt Situated at Erfurt aerodrome, which lies to the East of the town, these workshops are engaged on the repair and maintenance of aircraft and aero-engines*
(3)
Engineering and Armaments
•Erma"
Zietenstr. (3)
The •Erma* Erfurter Maschinen und Werkzeugfabrik BiGeipel G.m.b.H, is believed to be engaged on the manufacture of rifles, pistols, machine guns and their components. They are reported to employ some 850 workers. •Garda* Werkzeug und Maschinenfabrik Zietenstr. (3^ Some 1,600 workers are reported to be employed by this firm on the manufacture of automatic pistols and machine guns.
J.A.Jahn A.G. Schwerbomerstr. (3) this company, which has branch factories in Scandinavia, formerly specialised in making oooling, heating, and cleaning installations.
It is now believed to be engaged on the manu­ facture of small-*arms components, and to employ some 1,000 workers. *Makc* Maschinenges. m.b.H. Reiohartstr. (3) Formerly engaged on the manufacture of vacuum pumps and their accessories, this company is now believed to make apparatus and equipment for the new explosives industry.
Olympia A.G. Mainzerhofplatz (2) Before the war this firm made typewriters and other office nmohinery but they are now reported to employ some 2,000 workers on the manufacture of small arms and small arms ammunition.
Leather Schuhfabrik Hees A.G* Erfurt (J) This factory i s reported to employ 1,000 workers on the manufacture of boots and shoes and to be one of the big suppliers to the German forces* Eduard Lingel S teigerforst (j) This i s one of the la rg est shoe fa cto ries in Germany and is now believed to be making boots and shoes mainly for army use* B B K B M S C g ir iC K (Teatphalia) See under Oer*Erk»n*chwiekr Recklinghausen» —— CO©— ——
E R L A N G E N (Bavaria) 49° 35* N. 11° B: 510 m iles: (33,000) Erlangen i s a small university town on the railway from Nürnberg to Bamberg and is situated on the Ludwigs Canal which connects the river Main with the river Donau* I t has ä small clothing and metal working industry in addition ’to the important Siemens works mentioned below*
Engineering and Armaments Siemens-Reiniger Werke A.G* Erlangen (2) The Erlangen Works of the Siemens Reiniger Werke A.G* (a subsidiary of Siemens A Halske) were formerly the Reiniger Gebbert A Sohail A.G* They are important makers of X-ray apparatus, a ll kinds of e le c tr ic a l therapeutic appliances, and dental equipment. Siemens Reinige? have a second factory In Rudolstadt in Thuringia and before the war employed some 4,000 workers* They are the leading German suppliers of th is type of medical equipment*
- — — 000— - *
g S G H W E G E (Hesse-Nassau) 51° 10» N* 10° It- 440 miles: (15,000) . Esohwege lie s On the river Werra some 12 miles Bast of Kassel* It has a variety of in d u stria l establishm ents, including te x tile s , chemicals, soap, and leather. None is of individual importance* —— oOo——
205
E S C H W E I L E R (Rhineland,) 50° 50* N. 6° 15* Es 280 miles (34,000) The town of Esohweiler lie s approximately 9 miles North East of Aachen and approximately 30 miles South West of Cologne. Xt is in the centre of the Inde Valley where coal, iron ore and zinc are found. Industry in Esohweiler is mainly concerned with coal mining , and some engineering. The most important industrial concerns are given below.
Public U tility Services Kraftwerk Zukunft A.G. Esohweiler (1) Controlled by R.W.E. and the Eschweiler Bergwerks-Verein A.G., th is thermal power station lie s approximately 1J m iles north east of the town of Esohweiler and adjacent to the Zukunft coal mine, (see under Solid F uels.) I t has an estimated capacity of 108 MW. There is also a switchhouse and an outdoor substation. A 5 MT and a 25 kV lin e provide power to the hearby briquette works (see under Solid Fuels) and the carbide works ( see under Non-Ferrous Metals) , four 35 kV lin es supply power to Aachen, Dttren, Nothberg and Heimbach respectively, and there are two long distance lin e s, one of 220 kV and one of 110 kV, to Fortuna and Aachen respectively.
Kraftwerk Kohlscheid Kohlsoheid (3) This is a small thermal station owned by the Esohweiler Bergwerks-Verein A.G. situated at Kohlscheid approximately 6 miles west of Eschweiler. I t s estimated capacity is 35 MW. Together with the Alsdorf station the 1937 output was 222 m illion KWH»
Solid Fuels Eschweiler Bergwerks-Verein A.G. Nothberg (2) The Nothberg mine (3 shafts) and coking plant of th is company lie s approximately J mile south east of Eschweiler. The coking plant has 120 ovens and has an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 512,000 tons» Eschweiler Bergwerks-Verein A.G. Eschweiler (3) Formerly Braunkohlen-Industrie A.G.Zukunft, th is mine has open p its north of the Zukunft Power Station and a briquette works immediately east of the power station . The brown coal and briquette production in 1937 was 3,895,000 tons and 919,000 tons respectively.
206
Gesellschaft fur Eschweiler Elektrometallurgie Weisweiler (2) Since 1938 this company has been a sub­ sidiary of Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G. and the Hermann Goring combine* It is a ferro­ alloy plant lying immediately south of the Zukunft power station. Its estimated annual capacity of ferro-alloys, including ferrosilicon, ferro/chrome, ferrc/molybdenum, ferro/vanadium, totals JO,JOO tons. Calcium carbide is also produced.
Engineering and Armaments Eschweiler Bergwerks-Verein A.G. Eschweiler- Aue (J)
Approximately one mile south south west of Eschweiler, this company owns 4 plants: 1) Concordiahutte producing foundry iron. 2) Werke Aue with rolling mills producing strip-iron, tubes and rods, also gas and water pipes, screws, plates and bolts.
J) Abteilung Stahlbau manufacturing steel constructions. 4) Werk Ermag with 2 basic Siemens-Martin furnaces and tube works producing seam­ less tubes and other types of tubes for industrial purposes.
Felten A Guilleaume- Eschweiler Draht A.G. Eschweiler (j) These works, owned by Felten & Guilleaume Carlswerk Eisen u.Stahl A.G., consist of iron and steel wire-drawing plant and rolling mills and produce, in addition to cables and wire, chains and metal drums. lynenwerke K.Q. Havermuhle (-) This is a small works manufacturing cable and wire products tnd accessories. — -- oOo— —
207
E S S E N (Rhineland) 51° 25' N. 7° 00* E: 310 miles: (1,139,000)
General
The area covered by this report is in the central part of the Ruhr; it consists of undulating country varying fron 100 to 400 ft. above sea level with some wooded area to the north and south. Essen includes within its boundaries a number of sprawling suburbs with a total population of 670,000; the original town and surrounding villages have long since outgrown their boundaries and industrialization has given the area a character not unlike that of an English mining district.
Essen is the great armaments centre of the Ruhr. Its reputation as Germany's greatest armaments arsenal ("Die Waffenschmiede des Reichs* as the Germans call it) originates from World War I in the course of which the famous Friedrich Krupp works expanded on a scale unprecedented in history.
In 1917/18 a peak figure of over 150,000 workers were employed by the Fr. Krupp A.G. undertaking, some 80,000 of whom worked at the main plant at Essen.
But whereas Krupp tnrougnout the last war remained the principal producer of armaments in the Reich it had, 19 to the outbreak of World War II, to a great extent lost its dominating position in the field of German arma ents manufacture, partly as a result of the complete reorganisation of the works after the collapse of Germany’s war machine in 1918 and in accordance with which several large departments were successfully switched over to commercial commodities such as locomotives, lorries, Diesel engines for heavy road transport, small ships' diesels, forged drums for high-pressure boilers, wheels and axles for locomotives, railway trucks and wagons etc., and also due to the fact that other important armaments producers, particularly the Rheinmetall Borsig works at Derendorf near Düsseldorf (20 miles B.W. of Essen), Germany*rf1 second largest armaments producers in the last war, have been consider­ ably extended and today are probably of equal importance as armaments makers. There is no doubt that the main Essen works of Friedrich Krupp JUG. remained the largest individual armaments and heavy engineering plant in the Reich, but instead of being one vast arms producing centre, as was the case during the last war, it became rather a combination of factories producing a wide range of materials and articles, many of which, although of the utmost importance to Germany * s war effort, are not of an armament nature. However, Krupp remains the principal if not only producer in Germany of heavy naval, coastal defence and railway guns.
r
208
It was estimated in 1942 that the total nuaber of workers and employees operating in the various Krupp torks was 175,000. This number was divided roughly as follows: - Armaments sections of the main works at Essen 35.000 Heavy engineering sections of the m i n works at Essen. 40,000 Krupp Gruson Works at Magdeburg (armaments and heavy engineering) 35.000 Coal mines, iron-ore nines, coke-oven plants, synthetic oil plants,etc. situated at various places in Western Germany 18,000 Friedrich Alfred Hutte steelworks near Duisburg 12,000 Friedrich Krupp iron and steel works, Essen, (situated several miles West of the main works).
5,000
Krupp Germania Werft, Kiel, (shipbuilding yerde) 10,000 Administrative staff at the various works, holding and financing companies, distribution centres, trading companies, eto. 20,000
175,000
At the southern boundary of the district is the River Ruhr, which is navigable by smaller barges from Duisburg to Witten,east of Essen. Across the centre of the area run the Enscher Canal and the Rhine-Herne Canal. The former is used for drainage purposes and runs from Walsum on the Rhine to Dortmund. The latter is an important connecting link between the Rhine and the Dortmund-Ems Canal; along it passes traffic which has coma down the Rhine and its tributaries to Duisburg-Ruhrort and by its junction with the Dortmund-Ems Canal the traffic passes on to the Mittelland Canal and so to the great towns of north Germany. Damage to any of the three looks would therefore have a serious effect on the industrial life of a great part of the country. It will be observed that many of the important industries of this district lie close to or on the canal harbours.
The area is provided with large marshalling yards and a network of railways, so interconnected that it is difficult to pick out those of outstanding importance. It is probable, however, that the Osterfeld Marshalling lard (see under "Oberhausen") bandies a large proportion of the traffic between Duisburg and northern Germany.
The other targetted yards in this area probably serve mainly as local yards.
The most important electrical objective in this area is the Essen-Karnap 220 MW. R.W.E. electric power station situated a few miles north of Essen. This is the most important power plant in the Ruhr industrial area. There is also a 45 MW. R.W.E. station in Essen itself.
Although/
209
ESSEN (continued)
Although it is hardly possible to distinguish any areas as industrially more important than others, because any attempt to do so would leave out of account some very important targets, it may be said that the principal group of targets covered by this report lie within the area of Essen proper, and stretch north-westwards from Essen-town to the Rhine-Herne Canal.
It includes the steel works of Friedrich Krupp A.G. as well as the vast arms, locomotives and general engineering works of that firm, besides large coal mines and coke-oven plants; the zinc smelters of A.G. des Altenbergs für Bergbau and Zinkhüttenbetrieb a t Borbeck; the plastics works of Presswerk A.G.; the very important chemicals and non-ferrous metals works Th.Goldschmidt A.G. (now inactive, see under Non-Ferrous Metals); and finally the important railway traffic centre Essen-Verschiebebahnhof.
During 1943, the town of Essen was largely devastated.
Extremely, severe damage was inflicted on the Friedrich Krupp works and it was thought that by the end of July 1943, output had been reduced to one third of capacity. Since then, some reconstruction has taken place, and by the end of 1943 output was reckoned at 40% of pre-raid capacity.
The works of Theodore Goldschmidt A.G. were also severely damaged and are believed to be inactive (see under Non-ferrous Metals)•
210
Transportation
Bailway traffic centre. Basen.
This centre also known as the "Verschiebebahnhof" is located adjoining the main station the greater part being on the Eastern side of it. The yards had a capacity of 2,600 wagons per 24 hours in
Marshalling yards. Kupferdreh (j) These yards lie on the southern bank of the river Rühr and extend for about X| alles S.E. * of Kupferdreh. They had a capacity of 2,600 wagons per 24 hours in 1938.
Marshalling yards. Frintrop (2) The yards are located in the N.W. corner of the Essen district, about 5$ miles N.W. of Essen main station. They had a capacity of 5,400 waggons per 24 hours in 1938.
Krupp’s Harbour. Rhein-Herne Canal (3) The private harbour of the Krupp concern, which leads off the Rhine-Herne Canal, is situated immediately north of the blast furnace complex at Borbeok. The harbour has a length of 768 yards a nd a width of 65 yards and provides the means of bringing iron materials to the plant. (See also under "Iron & Steel").
Public Utility Services,
R.W.E. power station. Essen-Karnap. (1) The station owned by the Rheinisch-Westfälisches Elektrizitätswerk A.G. lies on the Northern bank of the Emsoher Kanai 4j miles north of Essen main station. This is the most important power station in the Rühr industrial area. It was under construction at the outbreak of the war, and is believed to have been completed by the sunnier of 1943. It is hard-coal fired but brown coal can also be fired. The coal-storage ground lies on the opposite side of the Emsoher canal and between it and the Rhein-Herne canal.
There is a sizzle boiler house adjoining the machine-house in the centre of the plant. The 4 turbo-generator sets have a total installed capacity of 220 MW. A row of 6 transformers adjoins the generator hall, forming part of the open-air substation which also contains gas blast switches and auxiliary equipment.
The important 220 kV line from Leithe to Hamborn has been looped into the station but no other overhead lines appear to be connected. Probably
211
a considerable part of the output of the station Is supplied locally by underground cables« Thore may Also be a connection to Bottrop-Welheim.
Kupferdreh power station. Kupferdreh (?) Owned by Bergische Elektrizitätswerke A.G. This station is situated just East of the Kupferdreh marshalling yards and 6 miles 3.E« of Essen main station. There are 5 generating sets with an esti­ mated capacity of 34 MW« ( Viktoria Matthias power station« Borbeok (3) Owned by Friedrich Krupp A.G.. this station is situated at the Borbeok plant, about 3 J miles N.W. of Beseh main station« The plant is fired by blast-furnace gas and tar oil. There are 3 generating sets having a total estimated capacity of 42 MW« This station supplies the Borbeok steel plant« Amalie power station« Essen (3) Situated on the mine within the Krupp complex and south of Altendorfer Str« There are 3 generating sets with an installed capacity of 40 MW.
Kruppsche Wasserwerk« Lake Baldeney (3) Owned by Friedrich Krupp A«G. The works are situated on the north bank of the river Ruhr, 5 miles south of Essen station and | mile N.E. of the Baldeney power station« There are 4 generating sets with an estimated capacity of 34 MW. This station supplies all the water for the entire Krupp iron and steel works and the engineering works, and is believed to be the only available source of supply.
Baldeney Reservoir« (3) • 5 miles South of Essen, the reservoir is the source of drinking water for the Rhenish-Westphalian industrial - area« At the western end, on the weir, is the Baldeney Power Station having an installed capacity of 9 MW.
Städtische Gaswerke Essen. (2) Situated in Essen proper on the north-east border of the Friedrich Krupp complex, this municipal gasworks obtains its supplies from the Ruhrgas grid and the Thyssen grid, and ten independent coke-oven plants« In 1936, purchases and sales of gas amounted to 1,650 million cubic feet of gas« There are believed to be several other small gasworks in the Essen area, notably at Borbeok, Kupferdreh, Steele and Frillendorf«
212
Solid Fuels
Enil Coking Plant N.W« of Essen (2) The plant is situated adjoining the Enil colliery, 3 miles N.W. of Basen main station.
It is owned by Hoesch A.G. and there are 156 ovens with an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 900,000 tons« Wolfsbart Coicing Plant Borbeck (3) Owned by Gebrttder S t u m G«m«b«H. the plant is situated miles N.W.' of Essen main station, and just East of Borbeck station« There are 170 ovens having an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 455,000 tons« Gas is supplied to the Ruhrgas grid« Friedrich Ernestine Coking Plant N.E. of Essen (3) Owned by Direktion der Stinnes’sehen Zechen, the plant is located 2 miles N.E. of Essen main station« There are 60 ovens having an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 430,000 tons« Gas is supplied to the Ruhrgas ( grid«
Helene Coking Plant N« of Essen (3) Owned by Friedrich Krupp A.G. the plant is situated 2 miles North of Essen main station« There are 140 ovens with an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 317,000 tons« Sasaher Coking Plant N.W. of Essen (3) Owned by Hoesoh A.G. the plant is situated 3s miles N.W. of Essen main station« There are 110 ovens having an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 308,000 tons.
Amalie Coking Plant At Krupps (3) Owned by Friedrich Krupp A.G. the plant is situated within the Krupp complex south of AltendorferStru, ij miles N.W. of Essen main station« There are 82 ovens having an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 237,000 tons« Zollverein 1/2 Coking Plant N.E. of Essen (3) Owned by Gelsenkirchener Bergwerfcs-A.G. the plant is situated 2j ylles N.E. of Essen main station« There are 54 ovens having an anmal estimated dry coal capacity of 210,000 tons«
213
HriheH? Coking Plant Frillendorf (3) Owned by MannesmannrohrenpWerke A.G. the plant is located at the Hubert colliery, at Frillendorf, 2 Tnil*« N.E. of Essen main station* There are 80 old ovens working, having an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 188,000 tons. 2 additional batteries of 40 ovens each were being reconstructed at the end of 1943* Salser-Heuack Coking Plant At Krupps (3) Owned by Friedrich Krupps A.G. the plant is situated at the Sllzer-Neuack colliery, and within the Krupps complex 1 mile West of Essen main station. There are 67 ovens having an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 177,000 tons. The plant has its own power station (see under "Public Utilities").
Wilhelm Coking Plant N.E. of Essen (3) Owned by Mannesmannrohren-Werke A.G. the plant is situated at the Wilhelm colliery adjoining the goods station, 1z miles N.E. of Essen main station. There are 60 ovens having an estimated animal dry coal capacity of 153,000 tons.
Bonifacios Colliery Kray (3) Situated North of Kray station the colliery is owned by Gelsenkirchener Bergwerks«A.G. The output of hard coal in 1937 amounted to 1,050,000 tons.
Etadl-Enscher Colliery N.N.W. of Essen (3) Situated 3i miles N.N.W. of Essen main station, the colliery is owned by Hoesoh A.G. The output of hard ooal amounted to 1 ,489,000 tons in 1937* Frits-Heinrich Colliery N. of Essen (3) Owned by Hoesoh A.G. the colliery is situated 3$ miles North of Essen main station. 1,365,000 tons of hard ooal were produced in 1937, when there were 2,800 workers enployed.
Mathias Stinnes Colliery Karnap ' (3) Owned by Direktion der Stixmeschen Zechen?the colliery is situated just North of SssenUCamap station and miles North of Essen main station.
The output of hard eoal in 1937 amounted to 2,500,000 tons.
Königin Elizabeth C olliery Kray Owned by Mmiesmannröhren^erke A.G. the co lliery i s situ ated East of Essen near Kray.
The output of hard ooal was 1 .OLO.OOO tons inl?57>
König Wilhelm C olliery Borbeck This co lliery i s located North o f Essen-Borbeck station; i t i s owned by Gebrüder Stunm G.nub JI.
In 1937 the output of hard ooal amounted to 1»033,000 ton s.
Iron and Steel and Ferro-Alloys/
215
Jrcan and Steel arid. Ferro-Alloys Fr.Krupp A.S. Borbeck (2) The iron and steelworks of the Friedrich Krupp A.G. are situated 4 miles north west of Essen main station cm the Rhein-Heme Canal at Borbeck. This modem plant contains 2 blast furnaces of the latest suspended type having an estimated < annual capacity of 300,000 tons of pig iron. There are 5open-hearth furnaces with an estimated anmfal capacity of 400,000 tons of crude steel. The steelworks have cast ingots of up to 230 tons. There are also rolling mills, etc.
Raw materials are brought to the company’s private harbour, just north of these works, on the Rhein-Herne canal (see also under "Trans­ portation.*). Power is supplied td the works by the Krupp power station at Borbeck (see under »Public Utilities*).
Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication Goldschmidt East Essen (-) The site of the works of Theodor Goldschmidt /.
A.G. is situated J mile west of Essen main station, Just south of the railway line.
They formerly produced lead and tin, bearing net al, welding materials and sulphuric acid and were large producers of incendiary bombs.
The works has been completely gutted and is now believed to be inactive.
Karl Haran Kupferdreth (-) Röhrenwerk Kupferdreth, Karl Hamm, is situated on the south bank of the river Ruhr about 4j miles south east of Essen main station. The firm are makers of lead pipes. : A.G. des Altenbergs fdr Bergbau ' . und Zinkhttttenbetrieb pergeberbeck (3) A subsidiary of the Stollberger Zink A.G. fttr Bergbau und Hütt enbe trieb, this sine distill-^ atiori plant is situated 3 miles north west of Essen main station and has an estimated annual capacity of 30,000 tons of metal. (The output in 1938 was 28,700 tons). It is also Ostinmted that the works has a capacity of 34,000 tons of sulphuric acid. The number of ’workers is believed to be about 1,800.
216
gNSUCTRING AND ARMAMENTS
SädSSSLAsS* E S S E N (1 )
The engineering and armaments works of FRIEDRICH KRUPP are situated in the Western h alf of ESSEN i t s e l f . These works are built on a s ite of more than 2,150 acred, of which nearly 300 are covered by facto ries and workshops, the area being appro ximat-ely 2 miles long and a mile wide.
There are 11 open—heart h f urnaces, having an estimated annual capacity of 4)0,000 tons of crude s te e l. Pig iron and crude ste e l is also sent to these works from the BORBECK iron and ste e l works.
E lectric ste e l is also made. In the S.W. area of the p la n t, lie s the section producing WIDIA (tungsten-carbide), which is used fo r the tips of to o ls, cores of armour-piercing ammunition, e tc .
/
The finished and sem i-finished product* of these tremendous works cover an extensive range, only the more important of* which can be mentioned here.
The northern p a rt of the works contains one of the larg est locomotive shops in Europe, which consists of a simple building having 1$ p a ra lle l bays, with a to ta l flo o r space of over 88,000 square yards.
There is a ty re -ro llin g plan t covering 34,000 square yards, which has an annual production estimated a t 315,000 tyres and 120,000 wheel centres.
The numerous forges are capable of producing the larg est forgings for guns, including the heavier naval types, p arts fo r turbines and locomotives, and also sm aller forgings such as components fo r motor vehicles and a irc ra ft. The hammer and forging shops contain 120 steam hammers and 11 steam hydraulic presses. In the largest forging shop there are presses of 200, 400, and 500 tons capacity, and one large press of 1,500 tons capacity, which i s served by two 400-ton cranes manipulating the ingots, while another two 100-ton cranes handle the necessary to o ls. * Amongst the many ro llin g m ills are those .containing drawing and flanging presses of various capacity, aggregating ever 8,000 tons.
There are several foundries fo r iro n , malleable iron, ru stle ss and h eat-resistin g castings and non-ferrous castings in b rass, bronzes, and aluminium.
Besides these, there are numerous other shops engaged on general engineering.
The number of employees engaged in the heavy engineering and armaments section of the works was estimated at 75,000 in 1942» The harbour on the RHETN-HERNE canal is described under ‘‘Transportation", the power statio n and waterworks under "Public U tilitie s", the coking plants and c o llie rie s under "Solid Fuels", and the Borbeck plant under "Iron and Steel". A note on Krupp*s generally is to be found in the introduction to "ESSEN", which alto covers the question of bomb damage.
Buderussohe/
217
Buderassohe Eisexwerke
Situated 3 miles East of Essen in the suburb of Kray, this works manufactures cast pipes, baths, hardware and enamelware.
Ausfuhrux^srechte Ifeschinen-Bau A.G. Union, (Denag) H. Neuenburg, Bergwerksmaschineribau Bail Wolff Maschinenfabrik G.m.b«H» Skip Compagnie A.G.
These firns are four of several in Essen all engaged on the production of shaft windig equipment and mining machinery in general.
CHEMTGAXS •
Carbidwerk W. Vogelsang Guiub^.
Situated 6 miles South East of Essen in the suburb of Steele, this works is believed to have a capacity of 6,000 tons per annum of calcium carbide.
Kray (?)
Essen Altessen Essen Essen
(5)
Steele (-)
218
E S S L I N G E N
See under Stuttgart ----—0O0-------
E U S K IR C H E N (Rhineland) 50° 40’ N. 6° 50’ E: J10 miles: (16,000) Euskirchen is on the direct railway line from Cologne via Trier to the Saar. Two branch lines lead from Euskirchen to Duren ( to the West) and to Bonn (to the East)« It has a small tex tile and engineering industry.
-------o0o-------
-20.9-
FALKENSEE (Brandenburg) 32° 35’ N. 13° 5* E: 570 miles: (25,000) Falkensee, though a separate xfiunioipality, almost adjoins the outer suburbs of Berlin, being immediately west of Spandau.
Apart from the factory mentioned below there are no industries of individual importance.
Engineering and Armaments Barlin-Seegefelder Falkensee (3) The Berlin-Seegefelder Industrie A.G. are manufac­ turers of high pressure steel containers. They were employing some 700 workers in 1939.
FALKENSTEIN (Saxony) 50° 30’ N. 12° 20’ E: 550 miles: (16,000) Falkenstein is situated in the S.W. part of Saxony and has a number of textile factories. It specialises in curtain and lace manufacture. These firms are of little individual importance.
Textiles, Bay on, Pulp and Paper Gardinen Weberei Falkenstein (-) The Falkenst einer Gardinenweberei u. Bleicherei worm. Georg Thorey manufactured curtains before the war and employed some 2,000 workers. Nothing is known regarding the firm’s present activities.
Dresdner Gardinen A.G. Falkenstein (-) v This is one of three curtain and lace factories belonging to the Dresdner Gardinen u. Spitzen Manufaktur A.G. of Dresden.
— -oOo--
FALTiERSTJEEggy (Hanover) 52° 25’ N. 10° 40* E: 470 miles: (39,000) Fallersleben, which is 16 miles N.E. of the town of Brunswick, until 1935 had not more than 3,000 inhabitants. It was chosen as the site of the Peoples Car factory - Volkswagenwerke - and developed rapidly and simultaneously with the erection of the great automobile works. Since 1940 a number of workers’ colonies have been built in the vicinity of the works mainly for the purpose of housing prisoners of war, and labour imported from occupied countries.
Public Utility Electricity Works Fallersleben (2) The Power Station is owned by the Volkswagenwerke
- 220 -
G.m.b.H., and is situated at the eastern end of the works, on the Mittelland Canal, and the main Hanover-Berlin railway. The plant is designed for duplication or even triplication, but it is possible that the generating station is not in use, and that the wobks is obtaining its electrical requirements from outside sources. There is a single boiler house and a single generator house.
The generator house is reported to contain 63 M.W. of generating plant capacity, but details of the sets are not known.
A medium voltage line connects via Weferlingen to the important 220 kV substation at Hasbke between Brunswick and Magdeburg.
Engineering and Armaments
Volkswagenwerke Fallersleben (2) The Volkswagenwerke G.nub.H. belonging to the Heimann Goring concern was originally intended to mass-produce an austerity-type automobile designed by Dr. POrohe, a former chief engineer of the Daimler-Benz A.G. at Stuttgart-Unterfürkheim. At the outbreak of the war the Fallersleben plant was still under construction, and it has never been utilized for its original purpose. < However, much of the original installations are now employed on the large scale manufacture of a military version of the "Peoples’ Car" in both the normal and amphibious types. Another major activity of this works is believed to be the repair of aircraft fuselages and possibly also the manufacture of components. Ground intelligence suggests that at least one section of the works is engaged on the machining of bombs up to 2,000 kg. It is believed that approximately 15,000 workers are eeiployed at Fallersleben.
— 0 O 0 ---
FERNDORF (Westphalia) 50° 55' K. 8° B: 355 nd. lea: (2,800) Ferndorf is four miles north of Siegen and has no noteworthy industries other than that mentioned below. nearing and Armaments Stahlschmidt Ferndorf (j) The Albert Sohaub-Eberh. Stahlschmidt G.m.b.H. are known as manufacturers of boilers. They are now reported to be building gas-producer shells for arny use.
— -0O 0—
- 221 -
FINKENHEEKD (Brandenburg) 5^° 20’ N. 14° 30* E: 630 miles: (3,000) Thermal Power Station % Near Frankfort - a.d. - Oder.
This important thermal power station ■'is owned by the Märkisches Elektrizitätswerk A.G. (M.E.W.) Berlin, and has an installed capacity of 232 M.W.
Begun in 1921, it has been frequently extended, and there is space for an ultimate capacity of 400 M.W. The station supplies power to Brandenburg province, Berlin, Lower Siberia, Grenzmark, Pomerania, and Mecklenburg-St relit z.
It is situated on the brown coalfield 5 miles south of Frankfurt a.d. Oder, on the Brieskow Lake, a stretch of water running south from the Oder, sharp north of the point where the lake is Joined to the Friedrich-Wilhelm Kanai.
There are 3 boiler-houses and a fourth may have been built when the station* s capacity was increased in 1940. There are 7 turbo-generator sets; the seventh with a capacity of 50 M.W, was installed in 1940. An important substation containing the 6/50 kV and the 6/110 kV trans­ formers, and the switchgear, is attached to the station. One 50 kF double-circuit line connects to Frankfurt a.d* Oder, two 110 kV. double-circuit lines go to Fürstenwalde, thenee to Berlin. 2 H O kV. double-circuit lines go to Guben, and one to Landsberg.
— -oOo--
FINNENTROP (Westphalia) 51° 10*N. 8° E: 350 Julies: (1,500) Finnentrop is one of the many small industrial towns situated along the valley of the river Lenne between Hagen and Siegen. Apart from that mentioned below there are no factories of individual importance.
Iron and Steel and Ferro-Alloys Netter u. Jakobi Finnentrop (3) The Netter u. Jakobi Werke K.G* of Frankfort/Main have a large sheet rolling mill in Finnentrop where 1,000 workers were «ployed in 1939.
— -oOo— -
FINSTERWALDE (Brandenburg) 51° 35* N. 13° 40* E: 595 miles: (17,000) Finsterwalde, which is 25 miles west of Cottbus, has a number of industrial establishments in addition to those mentioned below, such as
bicycles, cloth, furniture and soap factories. No one of these is of individual note.
Engineering and Armaments
Reichelt Finsterwalde (3) The Reichelt Metallschrauben A.G-. are makers of screws, nuts, bolts, and machine tools. Between 19J3 and 1939 they increased their number of workers four-fold and were employing some 2,000 at the outbreak of war.
Kjellberg Finsterwalde (3) The Kjellberg Elektroden u. Maschinen G.m.b.H, are makers of arc-welding plants, dynamos and connector sets, as well as welding transformers and electrodes.
------ 0O 0------
- 223 -
FLENSBURG- (Schleswig-Holstein) $4° 45* 14 9° 25* E: 460 miles: (66,000) Flensburg is at the inner end of a deep fjord of the Baltic and lies close to the German Danish frontier* It is on the main line between Germany and Denmark and is a junction for two branch lines leading West to the North Sea coast and East along the Baltic coast to Kiel* It has a considerable industry including several small engineering works and foundries* Its principal importance is, however, due to the shipbuilding yards, now engaged largely on submarine construction*
Transportation
Railway Junction * Flensburg (3) The Junctions of the branch lines are to the South of the town and there are marshalling yards close to the main railway station* The chief goods yards are in the harbour area in the North East part of the town*
Public Utilities Services
Gas Works Flensburg (3) The Gaswerk Flensburg G*m.b.H* made 280 million cubic feet of gas in 1936* Schiffsbau A.G* Flensburg (1) The Flensburger Schiffsbau A*G* formerly a comparatively small undertaking building river craft and coasting vessels, was developed rapidly during the years 1934 to 1939 and the number of workers engaged increased ten-fold to approximately 2,500.
The company has two yards, the larger of which, known as the Neue Werft, is on the West bank of the fjord and to the North of the town« This is reported to be solely engaged on submarines and can undertake construction of 8 submarines at one time* The Alte Werft, situated in the town and opposite to the port, employs some 800 workers and builds small freighters and » river craft.
Engineering and Armaments
Gebrüder Klaus Flensburg (-) Before the war this engineering firm, which has its own iron foundry, specialised in dairy machinery.
- 224 -
P O R B A O H
48° 40’N 08° 2J’B 425 miles (2800 )
The T illage of Porbaoh 27 m iles S. of Karlsruhe, in the Black Forest, i s situated on the river Murg, a tributary of the Rhine and on the railway lin e Karlsruhe-Rastatt-Freudenstadt. I t is the centre of the Porbaoh or Murg-Sohwarzenbaoh hydro scheme, described below :
Public U tility services: Pawar Stations Porbaoh (3) The Porbaoh hydro-electric power scheme is owned by the Badenwerk A. G. Karlsruhe and has a to ta l in sta lle d capacity of 67 MW.
I t consists of 2 station s, Murg (25 MW) and Schwarzenbach (40 MW) and 2 small stations of 1 MW each* The scheme uses the water power reserves of the Rivers Murg, Schwarzenbach and Raununzach in the Black Forest, approxim­ ately 30 m iles S. of Karlsruhe. Two reservoirs were created fo r d a ily storage and for supply of water to the 2 main stations which stand on slu ic e weirs b u ilt across the rivers and contain a to ta l of 8 turbo generator sets. The small stations contain one turbo generator set each. f The greater part of the output of the plant i s transmitted over a 110 kV double circu it lin e to the Scheibenhardt sub-station at Karlsruhe, where connection is made to the main 110 kV. transmission system.
Small supplies are Axven lo ca lly on a 20 kV lin e . The annual output of the scheme is about 120 m illion kWh. and i t i s used mainly for peak load and standby purposes.
— — 0O0— —
F O R S T (Brandenburg)
51° 45’ K. 14° 40* B: 635 mil®»: (38,000)
Situated 12 m iles East of Cottbus on the main lin e from Cottbus to S ile sia , Forst i s a railway junction of local importance *nd has a considerable te x tile industry. There are also several firms making te x tile and laundry machinery.
Transportation/
- 225 -
FORST (Cont’d .) T ransport at ion Railway Repair Shops Forst (j) These are ch iefly engaged on the repair of goods wagons.
Liquid Fuels Synthetic Petrol/Storage Depot Forst (-) Although a synthetic petrol factory, with largely underground buildings, i s reported to e x ist in the woods to the east of Forst, i t would appear to be more lik e ly that a fu el storage depot has been b u ilt here. The area i s said to extend from the Forst- Sonmerfeld road to the Forst-Sagen railway lin e .
T extiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper Haensel & Co. A.G. Forst (-) This is one o f a large number of spinning, weaving and cloth making factories in Forst.
Haensel & Co. specialised in weaving horse­ hair fabric before the war. „oO o—
"F O R T U N A ” (Rhineland)
t
see under Bergheim.
FRAMKEKBERG (SMtony) 50° 55* N. 13° B: 570 m iles: (15,000) Thia town, which is 6 m iles N.B. o f Chemnitz, has te x tile and tobacco industries., but no factories o f individual importance. ---- oOo—
FRANKENTHAL (Palatinate) 49° 35’ N. 8° 20» E; 400 M ies: (27,000) Frankenthal, which i s in the Bavarian P alatinate, i s a largely industrial town 5 m iles N.W. of Ludwigshafen on the main railway line halfway between Ludwigshafen and Worms. It is 4 miles from the left bank of the Rhine, with which i t is connected by a canal. Frankenthal is w ell known as a centre for the manufacture of con^ressors, punps, turbines and other engineering products, and as the seat of one of the largest German beet-sugar refin eries.
Engineering and Armaments.
Baloke
Frankenthal (3)
The Frankenthal works of the Maschinenbau A.G.
Balcke, of Bochum, sp ecialise in the making of
226
pimps and conpressors. They are believed to be important producers of submarine pumps.
Prior to the war Balcke employed about 800 workers at their Prankenthal plant.
Klein, Sohanzlin & Becker. A.G. and ) Ktoile, Kopp and Kausch A.G. ) Frankenthal (1) The KSB factory is a well known maker of pumps and compressors as well as of machinery for the chemical and textile industries. In 1939 the firm employed some 2,000 workers.
The KKK works are well known builders of turbines, industrial ventilators, air purifica­ tion plant, evaporators and a variety of apparatus for the ohemioal industry. In 1939 they employed more than 1,000 workers.
Both the KSB and KKK works have been enlarged since 1939, and are now believed to be working in olose association with eaoh other. It is possible that the nearby engineering works of Sohneilpressenfabrik Albert, which was largely inactive prior to the war, has been incorporated into this industrial conplex.
According to reliable ground intelligence, the KSB and KKK works together now employ more than 5,000 workers and are partly, if not mainly, engaged on the manufacture of parts of new weapons or appliances for such weapons.
Gusswerke A.G. Wormserstr. (-) This company belongs to Brown Bove ri & Co. of Mannheim and is believed to specialise in the production of steam eylinders.
Food Stuffs * Zuckerfabrik , Fwrikeithal (-) The Frankenthal factory of the Süddeutsche Zucker A.G. is one of the largest beet sugar refineries in Germany with an annual output of 160,000 tons.
- 227 -
FRANKFORT OK MAIN (Hesse Nassau) 50° 10» 8° 40« E: 395 alles: (570,000)
The area covered hereunder includes the town of Frankfort/lfedLn proper as well as the outlying suburbs Höchst, Griesheim, Nied, Rödelheim, Heddernheim, Praunheim, Fechenheim, Mainkur, Cher rad, and Niederrad, together ooarering an area of 49,000 acres« The nearby town of Off eribaoh/bfcin, lying within the borders of the province Hesse, is dealt with separately under Offeribaoh« Frankfurt is the ocranercial, industrial and cultural metropolis of the Upper Rhineland, an important transport centre, and since 1953 also important as a military training centre with a large mm ber of new and extensive barracks situated around the Friedberger Karte in the suburb Praunheim to the North of the t o w u
Conronications
Frankfort is an important railway junction on the lines fron Berlin to Basle, from Cologne via Nurnberg to Vienna, from Hamburg and Kassel and from Dresden and Leipzig to F r a m e and Switzerland« The river Main is sufficiently dredged to take heavy barge traffic several hundred miles up the river, thus making Frarkf ort one of the leading inland ports on the Rhein- MainriMnube canal route«
Industry
The largest industrial plants in the area are the chemical works of I.G. Farbeninaustrie at Höchst and Griesheim-on-Main some $ miles west of the town« Within the built-crp outskirts of Frankfort proper efe the Adler Werke, ir^ortant manufacturers of motor vehicles ^military transport, and immediately adjacent the large works of Alfred Teves which in pre-war days produced the well known ATE refrigerators and were also the leading manufacturers in Germany of Lookhead brakes and piston rix^s.
The Teves works have been enlarged considerably during the last four years and have replaced refrigerator production by the manufacture of retractable undercarriages for aircraft and a variety of other aircraft components« At Heddernheim, a North-East era suburb, is the important non-ferrous metal works of the Vereinigte Deutsche werke formerly well known under the name of Heddernheimer Kupfeiwerke« To the war industry this plant is of particular importance as a prominent producer of air-screws«
MW/
Many other factories, the production of which is solely confined to the supply of Germany’s war machine, are located within this tpwn. Among these special war products are ai m raft and motor-vehicle instruments, detonating apparatus for naval mines, precision measuring instruments, special electrical gear, including range finding apparatus for the Navy, small-arms- ammunition and so forth. Prankfort has also large grain stores, flour mills, power stations, and oil storage plants.
In addition to the huge chemical plants at Griesheim and Höchst, more than twenty other chemical factories are located, within, or in the immediate vicinity of the town. Prankfort is often referred to as the centre of Germany’s chemical industry.
This is partly due to the fact that the I.G., Germany’s great chemical trust, have their administrative headquarters here in - the so-called I.G. Hochhaus. This is a very modern office building in the western section of the town where more than 3,000 officials, are housed. In addition Prankfort is also the headquarters of the "Degussa" Chemical concern (Deutsche Gold & Silber Scheideanstalt) another in^ortant chemical trust* and of the Metallgesellsohaf t A.G.,. a large chemical and non-ferrous metal concern.
Principal Industrial Areas
Within or immediately adjacent to the built-up area of the town are a number of industrial targets of primary importance situated in two distinctly separate areas :- Area "A" - Stretching South from the Main Goods Yards to the River Main includes such important targets as the Adler Werke A.G. (vorm. Hoh. Kleyer), building M. T., A.P.V.’s and A.P.V. components, M.G. and small-arms components; Prits Gerner, making components for Messerschmitt fighters; Alfred Teves making M.T. and a/c components, piston rings, brakes, propellor shafts, valves etc., V.D.O. Tachometer making a/o and JJ.T. instruments; Hartmann und Braun making a/o and other instruments, gauges, etc.; and a number of small engineering works, as well as Peters-Union (Continental) making tyres and tubes and other rubber manufactures; as well as the three factories of K & C.A. Schneider, largest slipper manufacturers in Germany. Also within area "A" is an important 58 MW power station.
Area "B" - which stretches from the Marshalling Yard-Qst to the river Main, includes the Bast Harbour, Gaswerk- Qst; Messer & Co., making welding machines; a petroleum receiving depot, flour mills and grain storage plants; ’and the large works of Voigt A Haffner A.G. making switchgear and special electrical equipment. Roughly £ mile North-West of area "B" is the inportant plant of Naxos Union one of the leading German makers of grinding wheels.
- 229 -
Transportation
Railway Repair Shops Nied (1)
These very large railway repair shops are believed to be enployed exclusively on the repair of locomotives. Reports suggest that some *4,000 - 5,000 workers were employed in two ten-hour shifts in 1943. . '
Railway Repair Shops Frankfort-West (2) Reports suggest that this works, which is engaged on the repair of passenger coaches and goods wagons, was less active in 1943 than in , 1941 when 2,000 workers were enployed.
Hauptgdterbahnhof Frankfort-West (2) These railway goods yards are situated in the western part of the town adjacent to a large marshalling yard.
The area also includes the Reichsbahn customs house and a large number of storage depots with extensive facilities.
Railway Marshalling Yards Frankfort/Ost (3) These yards are situated to the North of the East Harbour. In 1939 they had a capacity of 2,700 wagons per 24 hours.
East Harbour Frankfort/Ost (3) The East Harbour was the larger and best equipped of Frankfort *s two inland ports. In 1939 the area included a gas works, grain silos, oil storage depots and many storage plants for general merchandise but it was mainly deed for the handling of the coal requirements of the town. During the past six months, many of the harbour installations and facilities have been destroyed by the R.A.F.
t
West Harbour Frankfort (3) This part is mainly for the handling of grain, flour, other foodstuffs and general merchandise. The main facilities are the storage capacity of 100,000 tons.
- 230 -
Public Utility Services
Städtisches Elektrizitätswerk Frankfort (2 This municipal thermal power is situated on the river Main in the Gutleut Strasse, to the S.W. of the central district of Frankfort/ifain.
Built originally in 1894, it has been successively extended, but the plant is old and the capacity is insufficient to^meet the requirements of the city, so that a supplementary supply is imported from the Preussische Elektrizitlts JLGk (preag. ) and the BW.E. Its installed capacity is 58 MW.
There are 35 kV. lines connected to the Osthafenplatz, Schillerplatz and Bookenheim switching stations, and a further cable connects to the Griesheim hydro station* There are 100 kV. double circuit lines which link the station via Wölfersheim to Borken, and to Dörnigheim, thus linking up via Dettingen and Aschaffenburg with the Bayernwerk grid and via Kelsterbach with the 220 kV. grid of the R.W.E.
Kelsterbach 5 miles S.W. of Frankfort (2)
This large sub-station is situated in wooded country, approximately 5 miles S.W. of Frankfort. It is .a focal point in the high-voltage transmission system, lines diverging northwards to feed into each end of the Ruhr industrial area, and southward to collect surplus output from the water-power stations on the river Rhine and in the mountainous districts of Bavaria and Austria.
The sub-station has two 380/220 kV. double-circuit lines to Koblenz and Rheinau respectively, one 220 kV. line, believed to be ä double-circuit line, to Kreuztal, and four 110 kV. lines to Aschaffenburg, Erzhausen, Wölfersheim, and Höchst/kain. The plant has two 48 MW. transformers for 220/110 kV, 2 sets of three single-phase reactors, and three Petersen coils.
-231-
public Utility Services (contd.) Elektrisitdtswerk Höchst Höchst (3) This is & small municipal generating station with an estimated capacity of 40 MW. It is connected by 30-80 kV lines to Niederhausen, Oberursel, and Wiesbaden, and by 100-150 kV to the Kelsterbach sub-station.
Griesheim Unterstation 3 miles W. of Frankfort (3) r
This is a small sub-station connected by 100-150 kV lines to the Kelsterbach sub­ station and the Frankfort municipal power station, to the latter of which it is also connected by a 30-80 kV line.
The capacity of this sub-station is not more than 10 MW.
Gaswerk Ost Osthafen (2)
Owned by the MAIN GASWERKE A.G., this works made 2,800 million cubic feet of gas in 1936 and bought a further 17 million cubic feet from the I.G. works at Mainkur. The works cover the area between the Riederhofstrasse, Kohlrauschstrasse, Daimlerstrasse, and the Schielestrasse, directly East of the East harbour.
Gaswerk West Bockenheim (3)
This works lies one mile N.E. of Rebstock aerodrome. In 1936 it sold some 25 million cubic metres of gas.
Gaswerke Höchst Höchst (3)
Owned by the HESSEN-NASSAUISCHE GAS A.G.
This works made 310 million cubic feet of gas in 1936.
Gaswerke Griesheim Griesheim (“)
This is a small gas works, adjacent to the eastern end of the I.G. Farben works at Griesheim. No details of production are available.
-232-
Liguid Fuels and Substitutes Oil storage plants Frankfort/Ost A li t t l e upstream of the East Harbour is a large petroleum receiving depot consisting of 58 large tanks with a reported to tal capacity of over 200,000 tons« Prior to the war this depot was used Jointly by the various well-known distributing companies D.A.P. Gr., Shell, Benzol Verband, Rhenania Osgag etc.
Non-ferrous metals Vereinigte Deutsche Metallwerke A.G, Heddernheim (Heddernheimer Kupferwerke) This target is the airscrew, aircraft components and non-ferrous metal works of the Vereinigte Deutsche Metallwerke A.G. (V. D.M«) (Heddernheimer Kupferwerke) situated about j mile North of Heddernheim, a suburb of Frankfort/ Main and about 4 miles North by West of the centre of that city.
I t occupies a triangular area of about 600 acres on the West side of the marshy ground which here forms a broad belt to the West of the river Nidda.
(1+)
This works has been considerably expanded in recent years, particularly since 1939, and the total number of workers employed is now thought to be not far short of 10,000.
The V.D.M. was originally engaged mainly in the production and fabrication of copper and copper alloys and produced sheets, strips, rods, sections, castings, stampings, extensions, tubes and wire in copper, bronze, brass, oopper- nickel etc. These products included many sp ecialities such as locomotive boiler tubes, condenser tubes, vessels for chemical plant, welding electrodes, bearing alloys, detonators etc. and also fine copper wire for use in e le ctric a l apparatus. / Owing
-233-
Owing to its great experience in the working of non-ferrous metals it was inevitable that when the light alloy industry began to be developed V.D.M. should play a leading part in it.
Products
In addition to its production of copper and copper-alloy Semi­ products Heddernheim is believed to be producing a large range of semi-products in light alleys for use by aircraft manufacturers and other armament manufacturers and an inportant range of specialized aircraft components. The semi­ products include sheet and strip, tubes, pressings and stampings, extruded sections, and castings. The special aircraft components are known to include airscrew hubs and all metal variable pitch airscrews, retractable undercarriages and oleo legs, wheels, shock-absorber devices and control gear. Examples of V.D.M. products in military equipment are also known, and the company is almost certainly also making light-metal fittings for submarines.
Capacity
An up-to-date estimate for the capacity of the Heddernheim works is difficult to produce, especially owing to the difficulty of estimating the extent to which copper-fabricating plant in this and other works has been turned over to working on light alloys.
It is known that Heddernheim had one of the best rolling mills in Germany for aluminium sheet and strip and produced about 6,000 tons per year which was about 10% of the country’s total former output* Heddernheim* s capacity for the production of extruded sections is believed to have been about 4,000 tons per year or about 25% of the total German capacity. At least 50% of the total output was required by the aircraft industry. It is also (after I.G* Bitterfeld) one of the two most inportant producers of wrought magnesium- alloy products.
The output of oonplete airscrews at Heddernheim at the present time is believed to be slightly above 30% of the total German production.
-234-
Non-ferrous metals (continued) Deutsche Gold-& Silber Scheideanstalt (see under Chemicals)
Silumin G.m.b. H. Fechenheim (j) This firm is believed to employ several hundred workers and to produce light metal castings.
Metallgesellschaft A.G. Fechenheim and (3) Griesheim
This is the leading German non­ ferrous metal trading concern.
It works in close co-operation with the I. G. Farbenindustrie chemical trust and the Deutsche Gold- und Silber- Scheideanstalt.
The firm’s headquarters are at the Reuterweg in Frankfort and consist of general administrative offices with a staff of about 800 and very extended laboratories.
Both the Griesheim and Mainkur factories are relatively small.
They are believed to be engaged on the manufacture of light metal castings possibly only for experimental purposes.
Aircraft and aero-engines
Alfred Teves Gustavsburg Str. (1) and Höchster Str.
The Alfred Teves works has expanded rapidly since 1935 and already in 1939 employed more than 6,000 workers.
In the course of the war further extensions have taken place and it is believed that at the end of 1943 some 10,000 workers were enployed.
Teves is a key firm in the German aircraft, aero-engine, and motor- vehicle industry. It is the leading German maker of valves, piston pins, and piston rings for aero- and M. T. - engines, one of the leading makers of pressure and oil pumps, brakes, / retractable
-235-
A5rcraft and aero-engines (contd. ) retractable undercarriages for aircraft, crankshafts, radiators, / propeller shafts, universal joints, master cylinders for hydraulic actuating devices, piston rings for submarines and a variety of other components for the aircraft and motor transport industries.
Prior to the war Teves was also well known as a maker of refrigerators which were sold under the trade name "ATE". Ground reports suggest that, apart from a few small contracts carried out in the early part of the war, activity in this line has ceased.
Vereinigte Deutsche Metallwerke Heddernheim (Please see under Non-ferrous metals)
Max Geraer
a) S. of Rebstock (2) aerodrome b) Gutleutstr« (2 )
Prior to the war this firm was engaged on the construction of gliders and operated a small plant off the Leipziger 3tr. Since 1939 the firm has greatly developed and now operates a very large works in the Gutlent Str. and another works (also reported to be owned by Alfred Teves) just south of the Rebstock aerodrome.
Gerner is now an important link in the Messerschmitt complex and supplies aircraft and aero-engine components to Messerschmitt at Regensburg and Erla at Leipzig. It is believed that the Gerner works now employ more than 5,000 workers.
-236-
Engineering and Armaments Nationale Telephon- und a) 134-140 Telegraphenwerke G. nub JI. Mainzerlandstr. (2) b) Kleyer Str.
The products of this works are telephone equipment, automatic and manual exchange^, signalling devices, air raid sirens, safety alarms, safety fuses, electric and factory time clocks, etc. It is believed that in 1942 some 2,500 workers were employed.
Diskus-Werke A.G. Frankfurt (3) Before the war this firm employed about 300 workers on the manufacture of precision grinding machines.
Messer & Co. G.nub.H. Hanauer Land Str. (2) This is the leading German maker of acetylene and electric welding plants, cutting machines, and oxygen and nitrogen producing plants.
Prior to the war Messer employed about 600 workers. Reports suggest that this number had been doubled by 1942.
Frankfurter Maschinenbau A.G. Bookenhoim (2) (vormals Pokorny and Wittekind) « This is one of the leading German makers of pneumatic tools of all kinds and is also an important builder of heavy machine tools. In 1939 nearly 1 ,000 workers were enployed.
Lurgi
Seckbach (2)
This firm consists of three associated under­ takings known as lurgi Gesellschaft fdr Wärmetechnik, Lurgi Gesellschaft für Chemie and Hüttenwesen, and Lurgi Apparatebau Gesellschaft. These firms are also affiliated companies of the Metallgesellsohaft (see under Non-Ferrous Metals). They are mainly construction and designing engineers but operate three adjacent factories at Seckbach where Soederberg electrodes, special plant for the chemical and processing industries, gas purification plant etc. are made. Research and development laboratories are at Wauson Str. and Gervinus Str.
Miag/
-257-
Miag 3>rankfort/0st (3)
This is a branch factory of the itahleribau and Industrie A.G. at Brunswick. The Frankfort works of M a g is believed to be solely ex^aged on the manufacture of Diesel engined tractors, the engines being supplied from the Motoren Werke at Mannheim.
A. Fischer A.G. Oberrad (2) This is one of the leading German makers of carburettors for aero-engines, motor transport and motor cycles.
Heinz Waerner Fechenheim (3) Prior to the war this firm specialised in the manufacture of screws, lock nuts, and a variety of minor components for the automobile industry* It is reported to be now supplying material to the Gerner aircraft components works.
Adler-Werke Kleyer Str. (l) The Adler-^Terke (vormals Heinrich Kleyer) consists of a group of three factories (Werk I, II and III) situated closely together and forming one single target area. It is believed that the production progranme of this large plant from the end of 194D until about the end of 1942 was:- construction and repair of semi­ tracked motor vehicles, repairs of tanks, production of engines, production of components, production of torpedo motors, repair of motor transport, manufacture of typewriters and bicycles.
Ground reports suggest that the assembly of armoured fighting vehicles and tanks as well as the manufacture of aircraft components were among the firms activities as from the end of 1942 on, but it is believed that, apart from the possible assembly of armoured fighting vehicles, the new activities are more likely to consist of repair work rather than manufacture.
V.D.O. Tachometer König Str. (2) This firm is believed to employ more than 1 ,000 workers on the manufacture and assembly of instruments for motor vehicles and aircraft. T»D.O. is the leading German maker of speedometers.
Maschinenfabrik vormals Ph. Mayfarth & Co. G.m.b.H./
•238-
Maschinenfabrik vormals Fechenheim (3) Ph. Mayfarth & Co, G.m^b.H.
Prior to the war this film was engaged on the mann fac tu re of drilling machines, presses, agricultural roach i nary and cranes etc. Some 400 were then employed.
Reports suggest that nearly 800 workers were employed in 194-3 and that a large part of the. works had been converted to undertake repair of military transport including A.F.V’s.
Bauersohe Giesserei Moltke Allee (3) This is one of thq leading German type foundries employing some 600 workers in 1939.
It is believed that a large part of the works is now engaged on the manufacture of small aims components and &Ä.A.
. .
■' ' ■ ' ' I . , ' - ■
D. Stempel A. G. Hedderich Str. (3) In 1939 this was the largest German type foundry and it employed about 1,000 workers.
Already prior to the war the manufacture of S.A. A. and small aims components was taken up and minor aircraft components were made on behalf of the Fieseler aircraft' woiks at Kassel. No film evidence is available regarding the firm’s war time activities.
Voigt & Häffner Ä.G. Hanauerland Str. (3) It is believed that this firm employed approximately '2,500 workers in 1943 on the manufacture of range-finders, special electrical gear and switch gear for the forces and a wide range of electrical apparatus and appliances. The works was recently severely damaged by the R.A.F, Hartmartja & Braun A.G. König Str. (3) This is an important maker of precision apparatus and instruments including firing apparatus for mines, range finders, aircraft navigation instruments, oil and temperature gauges for all purposes, etc.
The works is believpd to employ about 2,000 workers.
Lcroh, Schmidt & Oo. Haftauerld. Str. (3) Some 500 workers are believed to be employed by this fiim on the manufacture of precision machine tööls and gauges.
Fellner & Ziegler Kreuasnaoher Str. (3) This film specialises in the manufacture and erection of boilers, rotary furnaces as well as plant and fittings for cement and aluminium works.
Gunther & Kleinmend Rödelheim (3) In 1938 some 500 woikers were employed by this firm on the manufacture of machine tools.
/J.S4 Fries Sohn.
-239-
J. 3. Pries Sohn Pries Str. (3) This is a well known firm of builders and erectors of cranes, elevators, bridges, and heating and sanitary installations.
M oenus A.G. Bockenheim (3) This firm is believed to employ about 430 workers, mainly on the manufacture of shoe machinery.
Merz Werke A.G. Rödelheim (j) Prior to the war this firm employed about 500 workers on the manufacture of typewriters and other office machinery.
Its present activities are not known.
Deutsche Vereinigte Schuhmarchinen - Rödelheim (j) Ges. m.b;H.
This .American owned company is by far the largest shoe machinery works in Germany.
Prior to the war sane 850 workers were employed. Reports suggest that large parts of this factory are now engaged on the manufacture of shell casings.
Maxes Union V/aldschmidt Str. (1) (and others)
This company operates four factories in the Frankfort area. The main works is at Waldscbmidt Strasse/Wittelsbacher Allee and consists of two factories separated by a main road. One of these factories is exclusively engaged on the manufacture of grinding wheels whilst the other and larger works is partly engaged on components for grinding machines and other machines tools which are supplied to the firms branch factory at Seckbach for assembly. A further branch factory of Naxos Union is the firm Burkhard & Co. at Rödelheim, makers of small grinding wheels as well as grinding and polishing tools and appliances. It is believed that the Naxos Union group of factories together employ sane 1,500 workers.
Fontaine & Go’. Bockenheim (?).
This firm is associated with the Naxos Union but operates as an independent company.
It is engaged on the manufacture of grinding wheels.
Chemicals and Explosives.
Hiag-V erein. Mainkifr (3)
The Hiag-Verein, Holzverkehlungs-IriduStrie G.m.b.H. are a branch of the Deutsche Gold-und
/ S i l b e r
- 2 W -
Hiag-V erein (Contd.)
Silber Scheideaustalt. The Mainkur works is engaged on the production of solvents, aldehydes, ketones and the distillation of wood.
Merz & Co. Eckenheimerld.Str. (3) This firm is believed to employ several hundred workers on the manufacture of pharmaceuticals.
Hmmer & Co. Niederrad (3) The Vereinigte Chininfabriken Dimmer & Co.
G.m.b.H. are one of the leading German quinine refiners.
Deutsche Gold & Silber a) Weissfrauen Str.
Scheideaustalt. b) Westhafen This very important chemical apd non-ferrous metal firm has a number of large works in different parts of Germany. Their Frankfort works are relatively small but important because they include the firmer principal research laboratories.
The Weissfrauen Str. works includes the firms administrative offices, where in 1939 some 1,200 persons were employed, as well as chemical laboratories and a small production plant*
The Westhafen plant is ,fairly large and is mainly- engaged on the separation and treatment of precious metals. It includes extensive laboratories.
Dr. C. Schleussner A.G. Eschers heimerld. Str. (3) and Neu-Isenburg.
This firm is believed to employ some 600 workers on the manufacture of photographic film, plates, and paper.
I.G. Farbenindustrie A.G. Mainkur (2) These very large works were formerly known as Leopold Cassella, Mainkur. They are important producers of sulphuric acid and dyestuffs as well as of arsenicals and synthetic resins.
The dyestuffs produced here are mainly- supplied to dyers of artificial fibres.
I.G. Parbenindustrie A.G» Gfiesheim (2) These large works were formerly known as the
Griesheim Elektron. They are mainly engaged
on the production of sulphuric acid, n itric acid, fertilizers, caustic soda and chlorine, cyanamide, and industrial gases.
/I. G. Farbenindustrie
-241
I.G. Farbenindustrie A.G. Höchst (1) This is one of the principal works of the I.G. trust.
The products known to be produced are heavy chemicals (sulphuric, nitric,and hydrochloric acids, chlorine and fertilisers), intermediates, dyestuffs, pharmaceuticals, solvents, plastics, Chlorsulphuric acid (used for smoke screens) j capacities of this plant as per 1943 are estimated as follows:-
•
Tons per annum Sulphuric acid 300,000 Nitric Acid 120,000 Chlorine 25,000 It has been frequently reported that poison gas and other chemical warfare substances are made here but this has not as yet been definitely ascertained.
Textiles
Deutsche Kleider Werke Bismark Allee (3) It is believed vnat seme 1,200 workers are employed at this large Government owned factory1 on the manufacture of military clothing particularly on garments for the German Air Force.
Rubber and Tyres.
Continental Gummiwerk Mainzerld. Str. (2) This large rubber fabricating plant was formerly known as the Peters Union Gummiwerke.
It now forms part of the Continental combine which has its headquarters and main works at Hanover.
The Frankfort works are believed to employ, seme 1,500 workers on the manufacture of tyres and tubes for motor transport and on other rubber goods.
Leather
I. & C.A. Schneider Mainzerld.Str. (3) I. & C.A. Schneider together with their affiliated factories Adler & Neumann and Golo Schuhfabrik, all of which are situated within a few hundred yards of each other, are the leading German manufacturers of slippers, industrial footwear and special footwear for the forces. Together they are believed to employ several thousand workers.
/Foodstuffs
Foodstuffs
Grossmarkt balle Osthafen (3; The basement and sub-basement of this, the largest market-hall in South-West Germany contain a series_of very extensive cold storage depots far in excessof the towns requirements. Reports suggest that large emergency stores are held here on behalf of the Reichswehr* Hafenmühl? Osthafen (-) In 1939 these mills had a capacity for milling 600 tons of grain per day.
Adjacent to the mills are two silos, each with a storage capacity of 5,000 tons.
Hafenspeicher Westhafen (-) In 1939 this grain and flour storage depot had a capacity of 20,000 tons.
- 243 -
FRANKFORT/ODER (Brandenburg)
50° 20* N. 14° 30’ E: 6JO miles; (86,000) Frankfort/Oder is on the main line from Berlin to Posen.
Subsidiary railway lines of some iiqportanoe from Stralsund and Stettin to the N. and from Silesia and Saxony to the S. f>ass through the town. The river Oder is navigable at this point. The industries of Frankfort/Oder are of minor importance.
Transp ortation Marshalling Yards
Frankfort/ (3) Oder
The marshalling yards at Frankfort/Oder have a oapaoity to handle 2,700 wagons per 24 hours.
Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper.
Greiff
Goepelstr. 22 (-)
The Greiff Werke A.G. are dyers and clothing manufacturers. Their works at Frankfurt a.d.
Oder are a branch factory, the main works of this firm being in Greifferiberg in Silesia.
Foodstuffs
Koehlmann Werke A.G» Kftstrinerstr. (-) This concern specialises in the processing of potatoes to yield starch, potato flour, dextrose, and other products. They are a leading firm in this branch and have several factories in N. E. Germany of which those at Frankf ort/Oder and Schneidemahl are the largest.
---- o0o— —
F R E C H E N (Rhineland) 50° 55* N. 6° 50* E: J05 miles: (16,000) Situated 10 km« West of* Cologne, Frechen is the centre of a considerable b riq u ettin g industry, u tilis in g the large brown coal deposits close to the town* There are no other industries of importance.
Solid Fuels Bröwn-coal Mines and Briquette Works. Frechen (j) There are a number of these undertakings min ing and briquetting the brown coal in the neighbour­ hood of Frechen. They belpng to the I.G. Farben­ industrie A.G., Rheinische A.G* für Braunkohle, and others. . In 1937 3? m illion tons of brown coal and 1 m illion tons of b riq u ettes were produced by these undertakings*
«••«»••oüo————— F R E I B E R G (Saxony) 50° 55' N. J0° 20' E: 585 miles: (38,000) Freiberg is 30 miles Bast of Chemnitz on the main lin e to Dresden and was formerly the centre of a lead and silv e r mining area now no longer worked* Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication B leiindustrie Branderstr. (-) The B leiindustrie A.G. Vorm. Jung u* Lindig are manufacturers of lead piping and other lead products as well as of apparatus fo r the chemical industry.
Arthur Meissner Freiberg (-) This firm specialises in weighing machines and measuring instruments*
leather
Moritz Stecher Freiberg (-) Maker of sole and b eltin g leath er. ——-0O0-——
F R E I B U R G (Baden) 48° N. 70 50’ E: 430 id le s: (119,000) Freiburg is on the main railway lin e leading to Basle ®nd is a junction for two important branch lin es leading West &oross the Rhine a t Breisach into France and East through the Black Forest (Hüllental}, to Donaueschingen and Bavaria. There are various small in d u strial firms but only those mentioned below are °f individual importance.
/T ransportation
- 2k5 -
Transportation Railway Junction Freiburg (2) The branch lines diverge from the main track inside the town area.
There are marshalling yards on the South West outskirts near to the Hauptbahnhof and at the goods station close to the Industriegebiet North West of the town. There are also repair shops dealing with both goods and passenger wagons.
Public U tility Services Gas Works Freiburg (3) This municipal gas works made 376 m illion cubic feet of gas in 1936.
Engineering and Armaments Heilige & Co. Tenneribacherstr. (3) This firm of instrument makers which employed some 500 workers in 1940, is reported to be making radio­ location apparatus.
Textiles, Bayon, Pulp and Paper.
Acetate A.G. Angesserstr, (3) The Deutsche Acetate Kunstseiden A.G. ’’Rhodiaseta” in the Industriegebiet at the North West corner of the town is a large rayon factory which employed some 2,000 workers in 1939« I t is reported to be making a r tific ia l s ilk suitable for parachutes. The total annual rayon capacity of this plant is believed to be 3,500 tons continuous filament and 1,400 tons of staple fib re .
Mez A.G. Kartäusern ;r. (") Prior to the war the Mez A.G. were makers of sewing silk s and cottons, and employed 1,000 workers. They were owned by the Coats concern. Their factory is in the South East corner of the town.
Ground reports suggest that the factory is now inactive. --- -o0o-— — F R E I S I K G (Bavaria) 48° 25* N. 11® 45» Bt 570 miles: (18,OOO) Situated 20 miles North of Munich on the railway line to Landshut and Regensburg, Freising has a small te x tile industry and an engineering works which normally spedialised in brewing machinery and apparatus. There are no factories of importance • oOo------
F R E I T A L (Saxoiy) 51° H> 13° 38' B. 600 m iles: (J6,000) FREITAL, an industrial town, i s situated approximately 8 miles South West of Dresden in the valley of the W eisseritz, a small tributary of the Elbe, on the railway to Freiberg and Chemnitz, and is close to a small ooal fie ld .
Ligiiid Fuels Rhehania-Ossag F reital (J) The Rhenania-Ossag Mineralölwerke A. (k have a lu b rica tin g -o il plant in F re ita l and i t ia believed that i t s pre-war capacity was 70,000 tons.
Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys Gusstahlwerk F reital (2), The works of the Sächsische Gusstahl-Werke Döhlen A.Ck are believed to produce high­ grade ste e l for ship and aircra ft components, railway equipment, A*F.V’s, and armaments.
There are 8 open hearth furnaces and a large ro llin g m ill. The estimated annual capacity of Siemens and E lectric crude ste e l is 200,000 tons. Approximately J ,000 workers were employed in 1939* The firm has a branch works in Kainsdorf and one in Pim a.
— —o0o-——
F R E Y B U R G (Saxony) 51° 10’ B. 11° 50’ E. 500 m il.»! (4,500) Freyburg is 10 miles West of W eissenfels and apart from possible existence, of the plant mentioned below, is of no industrial importance.
Liquid Fuels Synthetic Petrol Plant Freyburg (- ) There are ground reports that a factory at Freyburg producing methanol was consisted in 1942 and was to have started production at a rate of 8,000 tons per month.
Confirmation of the reports i s lacking.
- 247 -
FRIEDBERG (Hesse)
50° 20’ N. 8° 40* E. 390 miles (11,000) Friedberg is 15 miles North of Frankfort/Main on the railway from Frankfort/Main to Giessen. It is the junction for three minor branch railways and is an agricultural market centre. The well-known health resort Bad Mauheim is 3 miles North of Friedberg. Apart from the manufacture of photographic paper by the factory mentioned below, the industries are not on a large scale. They include a varnish factory, a sugar refinery, and several small engineering works.
Transportation Railway Repair Shops Friedberg (3)
These are small repair shops undertaking the repair of goods wagons.
Chemicals and Eaqplosives Trapp & Mönch Friedberg (3) The Trapp und Mönch A.G. are important makers of sensitised paper of all kinds for photographic use. This company was acquired in 1932 by the Mimosa A.G. of Dresden, manufacturers of similar products.
— — o0o-— —
FRIEDRICHSFELD (Baden)
49° 50’ N. 8° JO’ E. 400 mile. (4,000) Friedrichsfeld is situated halfway between Mannheim and Heidelberg. Its only industry is the very large earthenware manufacturing concern mentioned below.
Engineering and Armaments Steinzeugwarenfabrik Friedrichsfeld (3) The Deutsche Steinzeugwarenfabrik für Kanalisation u. Chemische Industrie is bel.ieVed to be one of the largest German concerns making earthenware drain pipes and stone-ware. Th$ works occupy a large area and before the war employed several thousand workers. The supply of stone-ware containers and apparatus to the chemical industry is an important part of this firm* s activities.
— ---oOo-
FRTtPBTnHSHAW (WurtfaMfcerg)
47° 40' M. 9° 30' It 510 mile»: (25,000) Friedrichshafen is on the Northern shore of Lake Constance at the junction of the railway lines from Lindau and from Ulm which run together westwards from Friedrichshafen to Basle. It is a railway oentre of some isportanoe.
Industrially Friedrichshafen is probably the most isportant town of its sise in Germany. It is the seat of four very large engineering works; the Dornier Werke G»m.b. H., Maybach Motorenbau G»n.b.H., Luftschiffbau Zeppelin G.m.b. H., and the Zahnradfabrik Friedrichshafen JLGk These are situated at, or in the immediate ▼ioinity of Friedrichshafen proper and are supplemented by a number of small engineering plants scattered throu^iout the area»
Transportation
Goods Station Friedrichshafen (3)
There are goods yards and sidings adjacent to the railway station which are of importance in view of the large amount of traffic centred on the Friedrichshafen works. There is also a railway repair shop where the maintenance of locomotives as well as wagons is carried out.
.
• ? ■ ; •' /
Public Utility Services Gas Werks Friedrichshafen (3) Although these works sold only 108 million cubic feet of gas in 1936 they probably produce much more gas now, since the local industries are likely to be large consumers.
Aircraft and aero-engines Dornier Werke Gknub.H. Loewenthal and J Allmansweiler ) ' '
' .1 " , ‘ ,A - ' 8 ' 1' '■ V .-'' ‘ . ■ ' ' S ' ' "
The Allmansweiler—Löwenthal plant has been devoted to final assembly, special installations, tests,.and possibly repairs of Do. 217s.
In August 1943, according to a well- informed source, this unit was the oentre for the development of specialised Dornier types such as the Do. 217M, equipped with DB. 603 engines, and a high altitude reconnaissance type. At that time it was assembling 20 Do. 217s per month. Since then all / evidence
- 24-9 -
FRIEDRICHSHAFEN (continued) evidence points to decreased activity end recent cover of the field shows only 20 to 25 aircraft, including a number of modified. types and experiment­ al models. It is doubtful if new Do. 217« are being produced here at present, though repairs and the installation of special equipment may be continuing on a small scale.
Interest in this plant as a target derives mainly from (1) reports that the Dornier organization and this unit in particular are tooling up for production of F.W.190s, (2) reports that certain Dornier plants in the Friedrichshafen area are engaged in production of the Peenemünde 20, and (J) the possibility that this plant may resume production of Do. 217 fighters in an effort to make up losses in twin-engine fighters resulting from recent attacks on German aircraft factories and operating attrition of the GAF.
Dornier Werke G»m.b. H. Manzell This plant is the parent works of the Dornier oonplex at Friedrichshafen. A year ago it was engaged in experimentat­ ion and development of new Dornier types, the production of Do 217 components for assembly at Allmansweiler/Löwenthal, and possibly some seaplane development and assembly.
The nature and scale of the plant’s activities at present can only be inferred* from the accumulation of existing ground reports. This intelligence is summarized below: i) There is no evidence that seaplanes are being assembled, though the plant probably serves as a seaplane base and may continue to do experimental work on Dornier seaplanes. ii) Manufacture of Do 217 components may be continuing on a reduced, scale.
The total output of Do 217 s in all three complexes is not believed at present to exceed 20 per month.
4
(2)
/(ill)
- 250 -
ill) With other plants in the Friedrichshafen district, Domer at Manzell may contribute in some way to the production of pilotless aircraft. Intelligence . is not conclusive on this point but points strongly to some type of involvement.
iv) This plant may be tooling up for the manufacture of FW 190 components since it is reported that Dornier is to undertake production of this aircraft and Friedrichshafen has been specifically mentioned.
Engineering and Armaments
Maybach Motorenbau G.m.b.H» Friedrichshafen (1) While the Maybach plant has been variously reported producing ball bearings, aero­ engines, gears, gear boxes, and a multiplicity of other articles, its primary importance lies in the tank­ engine field. Virtually all German tank engines are Maybach designed and available evidence renders it probable that upward of 60 per cent, of all German tank engines pass through the Friedrichshafen works. The plant also produces about one third of Germany’s engines for semi-tracked vehicles.
Engine repair facilities of considerable size and importance are also contained within the Friedrichshafen plant.
Zahnradfabrik Friedrichshafen A.G. Friedrichshafen (1) Ground reports* and other sources of intelligence Justify classifying the Zahnradfabrik Friedrichshafen as Germany’s leading gear and gear-box makers. The relative importance of the firm’s several plants is difficult to assess but it may be safely said that the Friedrichshafen branch is one of the leading German gear makers, making its greatest contribution to the A.F. V. field, but being important also in the manufacture of aircraft reduction gear, truck steering gears, etc.
- 251 -
PRIBDRICHSHAFSN (continued)
Luftschiffbau Zeppelin Q.m.b.H. Friedrichshafen (1) The full range of products turned out by these large works is not known but it may safely be assumed that its principal activities are. a) the manufacture of gear boxes (and possibly also gears) which are made in association with the aforementioned Zahnradfabrik: b) the assembly and erection of RADAR equipment probably in association with Telefunken of Berlin. It is possible that the Luftschiffbau also undertake the manufacture of light metal covenants (castings and pressings) for radio­ location ground equipment and other puxposes.
- 252 -
F U L D A (Hesse Nassau)
50° 30» N. 9° 40* E. 430 adlest (32>OOO) Fulda is on the main line from Berlin to Frankfort/Uain. .
There are a number of firms making wax products and varnishes, enamels, colours and dyes and several weaving mills, of which only those mentioned "below are of particular note.
Transportation
Railway Repair Shops Fulda (3) , These repair shops undertake the repairs of goods wagons* 600 workers were employed at these workshops prior to the war.
I
Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper Val. Hehler Bdelsellerstr. (3) The Val. Hehler Segeltuohweberei A.G. employed some 1,750 workers before the war manufacturing water-proofs, tent cloth, and tarpaulins. It has been repeatedly reported that they are fully engaged on government contracts.
Rubber
Gummi Werke Fulda A.G. Kftnseler Weg (2) This firm manufactures tyres and tubes, solid tyres are also produced and there is a retreading plant. Although not of the first importance, it raised its number of workers three-fold during the five years before the war to a total of 1,800 in 1938. The Gummiwerke is now owned by the Vorwerk company of Wippertal. Its pre-war capacity of tyres has been estimated at 60,000 per month and its current output of truck and motor tyres at 12,000 per month.
•— oOo— -—
- 253 -
FURSTENHAGEN (Hesse Nassau)
• 51 ljr N. 9 42* E. U 5 miles: (1,500) Fürstenhagen lies a few miles south of Kassel in a wooded area and prior to the war it was of no industrial importance at all.
Since 1939 a very large unidentified works has been erected here and the large number of workers employed on its construction and on production within the completed parts of the works, are housed in groups of hutments in the Fttrstenhagen area, thus increasing its population to probably more than 5,000.
Chemicals and Explosives Unidentified factory possibly making explosives (2) No ground information about this plant has been obtained. Its existence was detected by photograph reconnaissance.
The factory is very large, and its layout is not typical of any known explosives plant. The size, construction and mounding of the buildings suggests very strongly that it is associated with the manufacture of a sensitive high explosive, and there is certainly nothing which can be associated with the manufacture of a solid propellant explosive or with the manufacture of propellant powder.
— — - 0 O 0 ------------
PURSTENWAIDE (Brandenburg)
50 20' N. 14 5' E. 610 miles: (28,000)
Fürstenwalde is on the River Spree halfway between Berlin and Frankfort/Oder. The Spree is connected by canal with the Oder and Fürstenwalde is well situated for inland water transport. The town has had in recent years a considerable industrial development, and the torpedo works of the Julius Pintsch concern have given it additional importance since the outbreak of war. The chief industrial plants are mentioned below, including those at Ketschendorf, a settlement which lies one mile to the South East.
< ■
_ • • .
/iron, Steel and Ferro Alloy»
- 254 -
Iron, Steel and Ferro Alloys
Hanmerhütte Ketschendorf (3) It is reported that a small iron and steel works known as the Eisen & Stahlwerke Hanmerhütte has recently been considerably enlarged and is producing A.A. shells* The plant includes a Bessemer convertor. Some 400 workers were employed here in 1939.
Nonferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication Chemische Fabrik Marierihütte Fürstenwalde The Chemische Fabrik Marienhutte Gr.nub.H. specialise in the manufacture of lithopone and zinc paints. They belong to the I.G. Farbenindustrie chemical combine.
Engineering and Armaments
Julius Pintsch Fürstenwalde (1) The Julius Pintsch K.G. of Berlin have established what are now the largest works of this concern in Fürstenwalde, to the North of the town and on the Northern side of the Berlin-F rankf ort/Oder railway.
This works has been considerably enlarged in the course of the war and further extensions are under construction. It is reliably reported that the works include foundries, turning shops and testing sections, and undertake the manufacture and assembly of complete torpedoes. The torpedo engines are supplied from other factories, and the torpedoes are fully assembled at Fürstenwalde and despatched mainly to Kiel for filling. There is a section devoted to the manufacture of mine casings and another engaged on the manufacture of aerial torpedoes. A separate steel-plate cutting and welding section is believed to make complete oil tanks for fitting to railway wagons, and intelligence reports suggest that this section also prepares steel plates for U-boats. It is believed that in «ddi fi on to the aforementioned armaments a fairly wide range of electrical and general engineering products are made at this works which has its' own machine-tool fitting shop where alone some 250 workers are employed. The total number of workers employed by Julius Pintsch at Fürstenwalde is believed to be approximately 7,000.
Kabelwerke/
- 255 -
Kabelwerke Ketschendorf (2) The Deutsche Kabelwerke A.G. belongs to the Kabelwerke Rheydt A.G. Their works at Ketschendorf are large-scale cable works equipped to produce «IvmdTvhim, copper, and lead cables of all kinds from telephone wire to high-tension, overhead cables* Ketscheniorf is one mile South East of Fürstenwalde.
Rubber and Tyres
SohtBsaxm Ketschendorf (3) The Berlin Rixdorf er Gunndwarenf abrik Hans Schumann produced light rubber goods for surgical and technical requirements in 1939. It has been reported that during the last few years this firm has been turned over to the production of tyre-repairing materials, rubber hose and belting.
Chemicals and Explosives
Dr* B« Hecker Fürstenwalde (3) The Chemische Werke Fürstenwalde Dr* B. Hecker and W. Zeidler G«m*b*H. are makers of pharmaceuticals« They are also inportant producers of solvents, particularly turpentines, ethers, and alcohols, also of aldehydes, especially formaldehyde. Ketones, particularly acetone, are also produced« The actual capacity of the firm in any of these products is not available.
Chemische Fabrik vornu Gebrüder Dollfus Furstenwalde (-) This f i m are also producers of solvents. Their Manufacture of ketones, particularly acetone, is iuportant but the amount produced is not ascertainable«
— — — «mu— OQO —— — « — «
FÜRTH (Bavaria)
49° 30« H. 11° 5« E; 510 miles: (91,000) Fürth is 5 miles W. of the centre of Nürnberg with which, town it is closely associated« Two main railway lines coming from the N« and W« through Würzburg and Bamberg respectively converge at Fürth before entering Nürnberg« There are two airfields, the largerof which io roughly two miles N.N.W« of the town and the second, where an inportant aircraft factory is situated, is 1 mile W. of the town.
The most important of Fürth« a present industries is the aircraft factory mentioned below, but the town cos^tains a great number of factories, mostly of small individual «ise, with a big »Hge of products« Glass mirrors are one of Fdrth’s main specialities« The Bayerische Spiegelglasfabriken. A.G. is the largest of several such mirror manufacturers« Toys, spectacles, and furniture are made by a great xinber of firms« The gold-beating, bronze paint, and metal* foil industries have mazy factories in Fürth and there are 5 large- scale breweries which, in peace time, did a big export trade«
Public Utility S e r v ic e s /
- 256 -
Public m iita r S em o»» Städtisches Gaswerk Pttrth (3) In 1936, th is gas works made 250 m illion cubic fe e t of g as.
Aircraft and Aero-Engines Baotaam von Bluaenthal A Co. Pftrth (2) The Bachmann plant a t Fttrth i s engaged on the manufacture of components ani does repair work for the l£e.11O. The volume of output i s not known wither with respect of i t s repair work or components mamfacture. A study of available in te llig e n c e in d icates that the Bachmann plant supplies fuselage p arts, control surfaces, wing u n its , and engine u n its to the Klag plant at Brunswick-Waggwu
W W * (Baden) 48° N. 8° 10' E: UO n ile s: (6,000) Fuxtwangen i s one of the several saall towns in the Black Forest where watch and instrument wiring i s the traditional industry. There is a technical school for watchmakers and, besides those mentioned below, there are a number of small works and workshops.
Engineering and Armaments Jo». Koepfer 4 SSme Purtwangen (3) These works manufacture precision grinding machine», tools and clockwork ccmponants (particularly wheels) for the watofanaking industry. They are reported to be also maid,ng aircra ft instruments.
Dat-frabrik Purtwangen (3 ) . The Dat-Fabrik B«U PurtwtaBler 1» a fa ir ly large watch and dock making factory where prior to the war several hundred workers were employed.
- 257 -
G A G G E N A U (Baden) 48° 50* N. 8° 20* E: 420 miles: (8,000) Gaggenau is 6 miles South East of Rastatt with which it is connected by a branch lin e. Its importance is due to the presence here of the Daimler-Benz heavy motor vehicle works. The other industries, mostly engineering firm s, are not individually note­ worthy.
Engineering and Armaments Daimler-Benz A.G. Gaggenau (2; This establishment of the Daimler-Benz concern specialised in peace time in the construction of heavy Diesel and motor lo rries, omnibuses, fire engines, and ambulances. They employed 5,000 workers in 19J8. These works can undertake the construction of the heaviest types of motor vehicles and are of considerable importance.
They also build high-speed fir e engines; i t is believed that the fire-engine department has been enlarged since the associated works of Carl Uletz at Karlsruhe was severely damaged by the R.A.F. in 1943.
Gottfried Lindner Gaggenau (3) The Gaggenau branch factory of the Gottfried Lindner A.G. of Ammendorf is a repair works for wagons, tra ile rs, and other heavy motor transport b u ilt by this concern. — —oOo— >—
G AR M IS C H (Bavaria) 47° 30’ N. 11° 5* E: 575 miles: (18,000) Garmisch, with the adjacent town of Partenkirchen, is well-known as an Alpine health resort. There are no industries of importance. —---oOo— —
G E I S L I N G E N (Wurttemberg) 43° 35’ N. 9° 50’ E: 485 miles: (16,000) Geislingen is a small industrial town on the main line from Stuttgart to Ulm. In addition to those mentioned below there are a few smaller engineering works and makers of machine tools. is also in the area of the Wurttemberg iron ore deposits, which are referred to below under iron and Steel.
Iron and Steel Gutehoffnungshutte Oberhausen A.G. Altenstadt (-)
- 258 -
Gutehoffnungshutte Oberhausen A.G. A ltenstadt (-) This concern operates the "Karl" iron-ore mine a t A ltenstadt 3 miles west of Geislingen.
There are no d e ta ils of the amount produced or the number of workmen employed.
Engineering and Armaments Suddeutsches Präzis ion swerk Geislingen (-) This firm make small tools p a rtic u la rly precision tools fo r the manufacture and vesting of threads.
Metallwarenfabrik Geislingen (2J Prior to the war the Wurttembergische Metallwarenfabrik manufactured household cu tlery , kitchen u te n sils and a very wide range of fancy metal goods. The factory closed down several sections in 1939 but is now reported to be making components for small arms and precision instruments and to be employing approximately 1,000 workers.
Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper Baumwoll Industrie Kuchen (3) This is the la rg e st of the fiv e fac to rie s owned by the Suddeutsche Baumwoll Industrie A.G. and contains 40,000 spindles and 550 weaving stools. Kuchen is approximately 2 miles to the North Vest of Geislingen. — oOo——
G E I S W E I D (Westphalia) 50° 55* N. 8° E: 360 miles: (15,000) Geisweid is 3 miles N r th of Siegen on the railway line leading via the valleu of the Lenne to Hagen. I t is one of a group of small adjoining settlem ents a t the southern end of the chain of metal industries situated along the Lenne valley. The population figure shown above is an approximate to ta l for Geisweid together vith Weidenau which lie s between Geisweid and Siegen.
- 259 -
Iron, Steel and Ferro Alloys Geisweider Eisenwerke A.G. Geisweid This plant, owned by the Klückner A.G.
Duisburg, has blast furnaces, three Siemens-Martin furnaces'and rolling mills» The estimated annual capacity is 360,000 tons of pig-iron and 150,000 tons of Siemens steel.
Birleribacher Hütte, Schleifenbaum & Co. Klafeld This works has one blast furnace but no steel plant. It is engaged on the pro­ duction of Siegerland pig-iron, bars, special shapes and sheets.
[ineering and Armaments Siegener A.G. Geisweid The Siegener A.G. fur Eisenkonstruktion Bruckenbau und Verxinkerei are makers of steel girders and plate for bridge building, pressure boilers, and corrugated iron roofing. They employed some TOO workers in 1939.
P. Schleifenbaum & Steinmets Weidenau The works of Schleifenbaum and Steinmetx are reported to be equipped with metal-cutting machines and steam hamers, and to produce sheet and forgings. It is believed that between J00-400 workers are employed.
Hund A Weber G. m.b.H. «weid Hund A Weber are makers of centrifugal casting machinery and foundry equipment.
■OOo«
- 260 -
S E L S E N K IR C H E N (Westphalia) 51° 33* N. 7° 6» £: 310 miles: (333,000) The region covered - the town of Gelsenkirchen including Baer - is in the administrative area of Essen and lie s 7 miles North-East of that City on the Southern bank of the Rhine-Herne Canal. I t extends North of the centre of the Ruhr and is approximately 9 miles in length and about 4 miles wide« The importance of Gelsenkirchen lies chiefly in its large hydrogenation plants and its coking industry«
Other industries include the manufacture of iron and steel goods and sulphuric acid« The most important firms are given below«
Transportation Twin locks Rhine-Herne Canal (3 )
The 4th set of twin locks on the Rhine-Herne Canal are situated 3 miles North West of Gelsenkirchen main station« Marshalling yards Schalke (3) The yards are situated lg miles North West of Gelsenkirchen main station« The capacity of these yards is 2,200 wagons per 24 hours.
Marshalling yards Gelsenkirchen (3) These yards extend about 1 mile in length an.d lie immediately West of the main station. They have a capacity of 2^000 wagons per 24 hours«
Public U tility Services Scholven power station North of Buer (1) Owned by the Bergwerks A.G., Hibernia, the power station is situated adjoining the Scholven coke-oven plant (see under "Solid Fuels") North of the railway, 7 i miles North West of Gfti aenkirchen main station« The station has an installed capacity of 100 MW, and is interconnected with other stations owned by the same coup any, of which Bermännsgluck (14 MW) and Wilhelmine Victoria (46 MW) are the most important. The to ta l installed generating capacity of this group of stations is about 200 MW. The group partly supplies the syn­ th e tic -o il plant (see under "Liquid Fuels") and the synthetic-amnonia plant (see under "Chemicals").
The electrical requirements of the o il plant are estimated at a maximum demand of 150 MW and an annual consumption of 1,100 m illion Kwh. I t is believed that these interconnected stations are linked up to the main transmission system at Buer substation, whence one 110 kV double circu it line connects to Recklinghausen and another to Herverst Dorsten«
- 261 -
Nordstern power station Horst (1) Owned by Gelsenberg Benzin A.G., it is a subsidiary of Bergwerks A.G. Hibernia.
The power station is situated to the North of the synthetic-oil plant complex, 4 miles North West of Gelsenkirchen main station on the North bank of the Emscher Canal. The capacity of the works is estimated at 150 MW.
There is no information as to any connection between the station and the grid. (See also under "Liquid Puels"^ Graf Bismarck power station North Gelsenkirchen (j)
This power station is situated 2i miles North North West of Gelsenkirchen main station at the Graf Bismarck co lliery and is owned by Deutsche-Erdol A.G. The installed capacity is estimated at 23 MW.
S
.
' . ■; \ ‘
Consolidation power station Schalke (3) Owned by Mannesmannrohren-Werk A.G., the power station is situated at Consolidation 1/6 p it , about 1J miles North West of Gelsenkirchen station. The installed capacity is estimated at 34 MW.
• k ■ ' ' ■ ' '
Schalken Verein power station Gelsenkirchen (3) Owned by Deutsche Eisenwerke A.G. (a subsidiary of Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G.), the power station is situated within the steelworks complex. I t is believed to have an installed capacity of 33 MW.
Municipal Gasworks Gelsenkirchen (3) The gas works are located 2 miles North West of Gelsenkirchen main station and ju st North of Consolidation P it 1/6. In 1936 the works bought and sold 800 million cubic fe et of gas.
Both the Gelsenkirchen and Buer gasworks(mentioned below) draw gas from the Gelsenkirchen Bergwerks A.G. and the Ruhrgas A.G.
A further gasworks in this area is one owned by the R.W.E. at GeIsenkirchen-Ratthausen which buys from the Gelsenkirchen Bergwerks A.G.
No figures relating to its a c tiv ity are available.
Municipal Gasworks Buen (3) These gasworks are situated 5 miles North West of Gelsenkirchen, just East of Hugo R.mine.
- 262 -
Solid Fuels
Nordstern coking plant North West of Gelsenkirchen (2)
This is the largest coking plant in Germany and is owned by the Gelsenkirchen Bergwerks A.G. It is situated 3? miles ’West North West of Gelsenkirchen main station and has 192 ovens having an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 2,096,000 tons. Gas is supplied to the Ruhrgas grid.
Scholven coking plant Zwecke.1 (3) Owned by Bergwerksgesellschaft Hibernia A.G., the plant is situated near the Scholven colliery 7« miles North North West of Gelsen­ kirchen main station and £ mile West of the synthetic-oil plant. There are 274 ovens having an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 1,367,000 tons.
Consolidation I/Vl coking plant North West of Gelsenkirchen (3j
The plant is owned by MannesmannrShren-Werke A.G. and is located at Consolidation colliery, pit 1/6, and lies 1^ miles North West of Gelsenkirchen station. There are 236 ovens having an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 1,051,000 tons.
Alma-Pluto coking plant East of Gel senkir chen ( 3)
Owned by the Gelsenkirchener Bergwerks A.G. this coking plant is situated half a mile East of Gelsenkirchen main railway station.
It has 143 ovens and an annual dry coal capacity of 1,035,000 tons. It also supplies gas to the Ruhrgas grid.
Dahlbusch coking plant West South West of Gelsenkirchen (.3)
Situated 1^ miles West South West of Gelsen­ kirchen main station. This coking plant is owned by the A.G.Bergwerksgesellschaft Dahlbusch. It has 160 ovens and an annual dry coal capacity of 760,000 tons.
Westerholt coking plant Gelsenkirchen/ Gladbeck (3)
Owned by the Hibernia A.G., this coking plant with 240 ovens and an annual dry coal capacity of 470,000 tons lies 6j miles North of Gelsen­ kirchen main railway station.
- 263 -
Consolidation m / T V coking plant Gelsenkirchen (3)
Owned by the Mannesmannrohrenwerke A.G-. and lying 1^ miles North of Gelsenkirchen main station* This coking plant has 80 ovens and an annual dry coal capacity of 470,000 tons* This plant together with Consolidation T/VL is believed to employ some 5,000 workers.
Hugo H coking plant Buer (j)
This coking plant is owned by the Harpener Bergbau A.G. and has 100 ovens with an annual dry coal capacity of 330,000 tons. It lies 5j miles North Vest of Gelsenkirchen station.
Graf Bismarck coking plant Gelsenkirchen (-)
Situated 2^ miles North North West of Gelsenkirchen main station. This coking plant has 210 ovens and an annual dry coal capacity of 230,000 tons. It is owned by Deutsche Mrdol A.G. This plant has its own power station of 23 MW capacity. (See also under "Public Utility Services".) Westerholt Colliery Gelsenkirchen (3)
Lying 2 miles North East of Buer and owned by Bergwerksgesellschaft Hibernia A.G-., this colliery had an output in 1937 of 1,193,000 tons of hard coal.
Bergmannsgiuck Colliery Buer (3)
• Also owned by the Bergwerksgesellschaft Hibernia A.G. and situated North of Buer«* Nord station. This colliery had an output in 1937 of 1,164,000 tons of hard coal.
Holland Colliery Gelsenkirchen (3)
This colliery lies South of Gelsenkirchen-* Wattenscheid station and is owned by the Gelsenkirchener Bergwerks A.G. In 1937 the output of hard coal was 1,121,000 tons.
Consolidation (including Unser Fritz • Colliery) Gelsenkirchen (3)
In 1937 this colliery, owned by Mannesmannrohren Werke A.G., had an output of 2,945,000 tons of hard coal.
Graf Bismarck Colliery Gelsenkirchen (3)
Owned by the Deutsche Erdöl A.G. This colliery in 1937 had an output of 2,700,000 tons of hard coal.
- 264
Dahlbusch C olliery Gelsenkirchen (3) This c o llie ry to the South West of Gelsenkirchen had an output in 1937 of 1,000,000 tons of hard coal. I t is owned by A.G.der Bergwerksgesellschaft Gelsenkirchen "Dahlbusch".
Liquid Fuels
Gelsenberg-Benzin A.G. Horst (1) This sy n th e tic -o il p lan t is situ ated adjoining the Nordstern I I I mine, 3^ miles North West of Gelsenkirchen mein station on the North bank of -the Emscher canal, and covers an area of about 160 acres. The Bergius process is used, bituminous coal being the raw m aterial.
Annual capacity is estimated a t 400,000 tons of o il products, the chief of which is aviation s p i r i t . Storage capacity is estimated a t 87,000 tons.
Hydrierwerk Scholven A.G. North of Buer ( l ) w This sy n th e tic -o il p la n t is situated immediately East of the Scholven p its (1 and 2) , 7i miles North West of Gelsenkirchen main sta tio n , and is a subsidiary of Bergwerksgesellschaft Hibernia A.G. The raw m aterial is bituminous coal, and the Bergius capacity 350,000 tons. I t is reported th at aviation s p ir it is also being produced here.
Iron and Steel and Ferro Alloys MannesmannrBhrenwerke A.G. North (G rillo Funke Works) Gelsenkirchen (3) Lying 1J miles North West of Gelsenkirchen main sta tio n , th is plant includes 6 Siemens Martin furnaces and ro llin g m ills. Products include ste e l sheets, b a rs, and p la te s , and the annual output of crude ste e l is believed to be approximately 100,000 tons.
Schalker Verein Gelsenkirchen (3) Owned by the Deutsche Eisenwerke A.G. group of Vereinigte Stahlwerke, the works are s i t ­ uated to the North East and almost adjoining the Gelsenkirchen main sta tio n . There are five b la st furnaces having an annual capacity of approximately 450,000 tons of p ig -iro n .
The plant also has an adjacent cement works.
265 -
a) Blechwarenfabrik und Verzinkerei 5 Karl Keller. Gelsenkirchen (-; b) Mannesmannröhrenwerke A.H.
These two plants specialise in the manu­ facture of galvanised sheets and products including corrugated sheets®
Gelsenkirchener Bleiwerk G.m.b.H.) Gelsenkirchen (-) Gebrüder Kestemann )
Both the above-mentioned firms manufacture lead articles, and Gebrüder Ke st eman special­ ises in the production of rolled lead.
Engineering and Armaments x Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G.w Gelsenkirchen- (Dortmunder Union Bruckenbau A.G.) Schalke (3/ (Werke Orange)
This works, formerly owned by the Vereinigte Kesselwerke, is situated 2^ miles North West of Gelsenkirchen main station. It produces sheet metal, gas-holders, oil tanks, chemical apparatus, pipelines, railway and road bridges* F.Kupferbusch & Söhne A.G. Gelsenkirchen- Schalke (i)
This firm owns two works: Work I lies 1J miles North West of Gelsenkirchen main station, and Werk II lies adjoining the East of the Schalke marshalling yards. Both manufacture water-heating apparatus and the plant includes iron-foundries and open hearth furnaces.
Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G. (Ruhrstahl A.G.) Gelsenkirchener Gusstahlwerke Gelsenkirchen (3)
This special-steel works manufactures cast steel parts, wheels, and axles.
"Stern" Eisen und Metall A.G. East of Gelsenkirchen (-)
500 workers were employed here in 1939 on the buying, selling, recovery, as well as sorting and working up of scrap metal.
Stern is believed to operate one of the largest individual scrap metal depots in the Ruhr.
- 266
Chemicals and Explosives A.G.fur Chemische Industrie Gelsenkirchen (j) This sulphuric acid factory is situated 2 miles North of Gelsenkirchen main station and just East of Schalke station.
The lead chamber process is used, and the annual output of 100% sulphuric acid exceeds 20,000 tons. The plant probably handles a large proportion of the domestic ore produced by Sachtleben A.G. (Homberg).
- 267 -
GENSHAGEN (Brandenburg)
52° 20* N. 13° 20» E: 575 miles: (13,000) This small town lie s about 10 miles due south of Berlin.
In the course of the la s t few years i t s population has rapidly increased as a re su lt of the great development of the Daimler-Benz aero- . engine works.
A ircraft and aero-engines Daimler-Benz A.G. Genshagen (1) This branch of the Daimler-Benz concern acts as the p ilo t works under the re-arrangement of German aero-engine production.
Air cover shows th at there have been many recent additions to the facto iy including the completion of a very large shop and a block of 20 te s t beds. The layout is of a very dispersed character, encompassing 57 acres of working space in a 885 acres site .
The production figure for DB-605 engines, which is the engine most widely manufactured by Daimler-Benz, was estimated in August 1943 to be 400 per month, and the plant was then thought to be approaching f u ll capacity.' % I t is believed th at some 6,000 workers were employed here p rio r to the war and th at th is number may have increased to 13,000 by the • end of 1943»
—-—0O0-——
G E N T H IN (Saxony) 52° 24.' N. 12° 10' E: 530 m iles: (12,000) Genthin is a town of considerable in d u stria l a c tiv ity being 18 m. west of Brandenburg on the main Berlin-Magdeburg line. Sugar refining, dyeing and paper making are among the principal industries.
Foodstuffs
Zuokerraffinerie Genthin (-) Zuckerraffinerie Genthin is one of the principal sugar factories in Germany, in 1938 i t had a capacity to process about 44,000 quintals per day.
—-—o0o——
- 268
G E R A (Thuringia)
50° 50» N. 12° 5* E: 530 miles: (84,000) Gera, formerly cap ital of the small prin cipality of Reuss, is the largest town in Thuringia. Formerly te x tile s constituted it s principal industry but since 1927 Gera’ s engineering industry has taken fir s t place and by 1939 employed approximately 10,000 workers.
Gera is on the railway lin e from Weissenfels to Plauen and Eger, one of the through routes from northern Germany to Bavaria. Branch lines lead from Gera W. to Weimar and to Saalfeld and E. to Chemnitz.
Included in the administrative area is Tinz, a suburb 4 miles N. of the town centre.
Public U tility Services
Gas Works. Gera (J) In 19J6 the municipal gasworks of Gera made 170 m illion cubic feet of gas.
Transportation
Railway Marshalling Yards Gera (3) In 1939 these yards had a capacity to handle 2,000 wagons per 24 hours.
Engineering and Armaments Moritz Jahr A.G. Liebsohwitz (3) This firm specialises in machinery for the chemical and te x tile industries and in 1938 employed some 800 workers. I t is in the v illa g e of Liebsohwitz 3 miles S. of Gera. I t belongs to the firm of Gebrüder Dix A.G. mentioned below.
Gebrflder Dix A.G. Weinbergstr. (-) Prior to the war this firm made special sewing machines for the te x tile industry and also produced gramophone components and needles. In 1938 some 500 workers were employed.
Wesselmann Langestr. (3) The Wesselmann - Bohrer Co. A.G. are makers of machine tools and are believed to employ approximately 1,000 workers.
Their works are in the southern suburb
of Zwötzen.
- 269 -
( W A (continued)
Heinrich Leo Talstr. (J) This firm makes air oonpressors and industrial storage tanks and are believed to employ some 800 workers.
In addition to the main works there is a foundry belonging to this firm in the northern suburb of Tins.
Karl Wetzel Karl Wetzel (3) Str.
The Karl Wetzel Maschinenfabrik und Eisengiesserei are believed to employ approximately 1,000 workers and to make borers, grinders and other machine tools.
Konrad Modrach Wiesestr. (-) This firm makes all kinds of punching machines and plate shears.
Robert Todt Reiohstr. (-) The Robert Todt G»m.b.H. are specialists in lathes and drilling chucks and have a modem and well-equipped machine-tool factory.
M, Jahr Karl Wetzel (3) Str.
The firm of Moritz Rudolf Jahr A.G-. specialises in textile machinery and machinery for the chemical industry.
In 1938 some 800 workers were employed.
Kurt HÄssner Oststr. ) z ( (-)
Fr. Aug. Jahr Wiesestr. ) Two of several small factories making machine tools, boring machines and lathes.
Chemicals and Explosives Zsohimm u. Schwarz Pohlitz (3) (Heinrichshall)
This firm, situated one mile east of Pohlitz, 4j miles N. of Gera, produces sulphuric acid and sulphur trioxide. Prior to the war their production cf acid was approximately 30,000 tons, and of trioxide 24,000 tons p. a. The consumption of pyrites was 22,000 tons p.a. There is no recent information about this plant. The firm own another plant at D81an referred to under Gcuz, Thuringia.
- 270 -
GERA (continued)
T ex tiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper, Gera - Greizer Zwöten ( - ) The Gera-Greizer Kammgarnspinnerei A.G. employed some 800 workers in 1937 and had a wool-combing and spinning plant w ith 59,000 sp in d les. Ifo firm information i s av a ilab le regarding the conqoanies’ present a c tiv ity .
Bardzki & Oeser Seidenweberei Gera
Admiral Scheer Str.) Kaiser Wilhelm Str.)
The above are two of a number of weaving m ills situ a ted in Gera.
--- -0O0--- -
GEVELSBERG (Westphalia)
See under Hagen
---- 0O0----
- 271
G I B a S B K (Hesse) 50° 35’ N. 8° 40’ E: 390 miles: (48,000) Giessen is the chief adm inistrative town of Oberhesse and the seat of a University. I t is on the railway lin e from Frankfort/Main to Marburg and is a junction of some local importance. There are no industries of any consequence, T ransport at ion.
Railway Marshalling Yards. Giessen (3) In 1937 these yards had a capacity to handle 2,000 wagons per 24 hours.
Engineering and Armaments Schuhk & Ebe Giessen (3) This firm is one of the smaller German makers of carbon brushes and holders. P rio r to the war they employed 300 to 400 workers.
Rubber & Tyres Poppe & Co. Giessen (3) Giessener Gummiwarenfabrik This firm manufactures mechanical rubber goods including solid rubber ty res on a small scale, as well as belting and hose. In 1940 some 300 to 400 workers were employed. —-oOo----
2 miles South of (3) Gladbeck.
GLADBECK (Westphalia) 51° 35' N. 7° B. 305 miles: (60,000) Lying at the north-west extremity of the Ruhr, Gladbeck is important chiefly fo r i ts coking industry described below.
Solid Fuels
Direktion der Stinnes ’ sehen -Zechen Gewerkschaft Mathias Stinnes P rior to the war 2,000 workers were employed at th is coking plant, which has 135 ovens with a rated dry coal capacity of 618,000 tons per annum. In 1937 the Mathias Stinnes coal mines had an output of hard coal of approximately 2,500,000 tons.
Gelsenkirchener Bergwerks A.G. 1-g- mi 1 es South of (3) Graf Moltke CoHiepy Gladbeck In 1937 one m illion tons of hard coal were produced at th is mine which then employed some 1,500 workers.
— 0O0—
- 272 -
& L A T a (S ilesia) 50° 25' N. 16° w E: 730 miles: (23,000) Situated approximately 50 miles south of Breslau and within 10 miles of the Czechoslovakian border, Glatz is on one of the main routes through the mountains between S ile sia and Bohemia. I t was a garrison town. There are no in d u stries of note.
—— 0O 0— -
CTAUCHAÜ (Saxony) 50° 50' N. 12° JO' E: 550 miles: (33,000) Glauchau is 17 miles west of Chemnitz on the railway to Zwickau. The town’s main industry consists of a number of small tex tile factories but the machine to o l factory mentioned below is of some importance.
Engineering and Armaments Wotan & Zimmermann Glauchau (j) s The Wotan & Zimnermann Werke A.G. are makers of grinding and planing machines, lath es, and other machine tools. The number of workers was increased th ree-fo ld during the fiv e years before the war to a to ta l of 800 in 1959» Chemicals and Explosives Bernhard Dalichow A.G. Glauchau (-) Makers of dyes and cleaning agents fo r the te x tile industry.
Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Baper Spinnst offweric Glauchau (j) The Spinnst off werk Glauchau A.G. a fte r being closed fo r some y ea.s, reopened in 1937 as an a r tif ic ia l s ilk m ill. Approximately 1,000 workers were employed in 1938, 011(1 the capacity was reported to be 31 tons daily of viscose rayon. ---- o 0 o ~ G L A U S I G
See under K Ö T H E N . —-oOo—-
GLEIWITZ (Silesia) 50° 18’ N. 18° AO* E: 825 miles: (120,000) Gleiwitz i s the most westerly of the three adjacent mining
- 273 -
Gleiwitz (Continued) towns in the extreme south-eastern com er of Upper S ilesia; the others being Hindenburg and Beuthen. The former Pblish fro n tier approaches within 2 miles of the south-eastern corner of the town.
Two of the large Upper S ilesian coal mines are, in the southern outskirts of Gleiwitz. The Klodnitz Canal, through which water borne tra ffic can reach the Oder via the valley of the riv e r Klodnitz, connects Gleiwitz and the adjacent coal fie ld with the inland waterway system.
There are several large ste e l and engineering works w ithin the town area close to the important m arshalling yards, and these are mainly owned by the Vereinigte Oberschlesische Hüttenwerke A.G. (VOHAG) • In 1939 th is concern owned ten large plants in Upper S ile sia at Gleiwitz, Beuthen and Hindenburg.
Transportation
Inland Port Neuweide (3) North-west of the town on the Klodnitz canal there is an inland harbour liiioh was in process of extension at the outbreak of war. Gleiwitz i s an important coal trans-shipment centre.
Marshalling Yards Gleiwitz (1) On the eastern side of the town are very large marshalling yards and an extensive goods statio n which are of great importance to the Upper S ilesian tr a f f ic . These marshalling yards, which can handle 6,800 wagons per 24- hours, are the focal point fo r the whole network of railway lin es serving the various mines and industries in the Gleiwitz, Hindenburg, and Beuthen areas.
In addition to th is heavy lo cal tr a f f ic , Gleiwitz is on one of the main railway connections to Poland.
Marshalling Yards Sosnitza (3) South of the main goods yards and of the eastern suburb of Sosnitza is a fu rth er system of shunting and marshalling yards.
Railway Repair Shops Gleiwitz (2) These are large rep air shops situated in the eastern quarter of the town, immediately north of the main marshalling yards. Some 2,700 workers were enployed in 1941, and the repair of locomotives as well as other ro llin g stock is undertaken.
Public u t il it y Services.
Municipal Gas Works Gleiwitz In 1936 these municipally owned gas works purchased and sold 1J7 m illion cubic fee t of gas.
274 -
Solid Fuels
Gleiwitzer Grube Gleiwitz (j) The G-leiwitzer coal mine belonging to the Borsig Kokswerke A.G. is approximately 1 mile south of Gleiwitz. This company owns 2 other large coal mines in the Hindenburg area. The Gleiwitz mine has 3 pitheads. A coking and by-products plant is attached. Before the war 2,000 workers were employed, and in 1936 the output was 1,200,000 tons of coking coal. The coking plant has 108 ovens, with a maximum rated dry •coal capacity of 657,000 tens per annum. A sulphuric acid plant, mentioned below under Chemicals and Explosives, utilises the high sulphur content of this coal.
Oehringen Grube Gleiwitz (3) The coal mines of the Oehringen Bergbau A.G. are near the village of Sosnitza on the south-eastern outskirts of Gleiwitz. Some 2,000 workers were employed in this mine in 1938 and the output for that year was approximately 900,000 tons of coal.
There are 2 pitheads.
Engineering and Armaments
The Vereinigte Oberschlesische Hüttenwerke A.G. (VOHAG) is a concern with a capital of 20 million Marks and was formed to unite in one Cartel a large number of the most inport ant Upper Silesian iron and steel works. In 1939 there were 10 large large plants owned by the VOHAG in Upper Silesia and a total of some 14,000 workers were employed.
Five of these works are in the Gleiwitz area and are mentioned below. Two large steel works are in the adjacent towns of Hindenburg and Beuthen (Bobrek) and are included under those headings. The remaining plants are in Andreashtttte, Königshuld, and Malapane, three small towns in the district east of Oppeln, which are also shown separately.
VOHAG Stadtwerk Gleiwitz (3) This plant is in the eastern quarter of the town on the eastern side of the main railway station, and comprises Siemens Martin furnaces, a foundry, forging and hammer works, rolling mills, and sheet­ steel presses for wagon components. The plant turns out railway equipment on a large scale.
VOHAG Stahlrahrenweric Gleiwitz (3) These large works are situated in the Gleiwitz Stadtwald to the north-east of the town and are equipped with rolling and drawing mills for all kinds of steel tubes.
275 -
VOHAG Herminenhütte Laband (3) In the suburb of Laband 4 miles north-west of Gleiwitz, the VOHAG have a large rolling nri.ll for band iron, rods, and structures. These works also include tin rolling and cold rolling plants.
VOHAG Drahtwerk Gleiwitz (3) In the Northern quarter of the town and immediately west of the main railway station are works producing wire, nails, chains, screws, nuts, and springs.
In 1938 some 1,600 workers were employed.
VOHAG Blechwarenfabrik Gleiwitz (-) The products of this smaller plant are pressings and stampings, metal casings and galvanised iron.
Press & Stahlwerke Laband (3) North of the VOHAG Herrainenhütte a large new plant has been erected during the war on a site measuring about 800 yards each way. It is reported that the production of these works is entirely devoted to bomb casings, in particular the 250 kg. and 500 kg. type. The firm should have started full production at the end of 1942 with the full intended complement of 6,000 workers, but it is believed that the coupletion has been delayed and that in the early part of 1943 only 2,000 workers were engaged.
Kesselweik Margarethenstr. (3) The Oberschlesische Kesselwerke B. Meyer G.m.b.H., a firm of boiler makers which employed some 850 workers in 1938, a r e situated to the north-west of the main railway station. This firm belongs to the Deutsche Babcock & Wilcox A.G.
Weinmann & Lange Tost erst r. (-) This firm specialises in armatures and heavy cast- iron and steel fittings for steam, gas, and water pipes.
Chemicals and Explosives
Sulphuric Acid Plant , Gleiwitz (3) Adjoining the Gleiwitzer Grube mentioned above under Solid Fuels, is a sulphuric acid plant working on sulphur recovered at the Borsig coking plant; It produces annually 25,000 tons of sulphuric acid.
Rubber & Textiles.
Georg Müller Gleiwitz (3) This is a Government licensed re-treading plant
- 276 -
with a capacity to process 600 motor tyres per month. It is also engaged on the manufacture of technical rubber goods.
— -0O0— -
G L 0 G A Ü (Silesia)
51° 40' H. 16° 5' E: 700 miles: (j0,000) Glogau, which is 60 miles north-west of Breslau, is close to the Polish border. It is on the railway line from Frankfurt (Oder) to Breslau and is a Junction for four branch lines. It was a garrison town. The industries which include sugar refining, starch, furniture and clock-making, are of no great importance.
Transportation.
Railway Repair Shops Glogau (3) These railway repair shops are believed to be engaged on repair and maintenance of locomotives, coaches, and goods wagons. Ground reports suggest that the works here have considerably enlarged since 1939.
Public Utility Services.
Elektrowerke A.G., Berlin Glogau (3) This is the principal gas works in the Glogau area, and svpplies the town of Glogau and many nearby inhabited localities. In 1936 the works made 117 million cubic feet of gas
———0O0——
GCPPINGaStf (Württemberg) 48° 45’ N. 9° 40’ B: 475 miles: (30,000) Goppingen is on the main line between Stuttgart; and Ulm and has a considerable industry of which machine tools and textiles are the chief products.
Engineering and Armaments
L. Schuler A.G. Goppingen (3) This firm is believed to employ some 1,200 workers and makes machinery for sheet-steel pressing such as the manufacture of shell and bomb bodies and steel helmets. A branch works of this firm is at Ebersbach 6 miles west of Goppingen.
Gebrüder Böhringer Goppingen (}) Approximately 1,000 workers are believed to be employed by this firm which makes lathes, boring grinding and planing machines, and other machine tools.
- 277 -
W. Speiser Göppingen (}) Before the war well-known makers of ag ricu ltu ral machinery and implements, th is firm is now reported to be employing 1,000 workers, and to be engaged on unspecified armaments production* Robert Bosch Goppingen (-) Göppingen is one of several towns in which the finn of Robert Bosch of S tu ttg art i s reported to have opened a new works with a view to decentralising production, but there is as yet no firm confirmation of these reports.
T extiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper
Karela Volkert & Co.
Göppingen’ Göppingen’
The Münchner Strickwarenfabrik Karela G.m.b.H. and the Württembergische Strickwarenfabrik Volkert & Co. K.G. are two of a number of small te x tile works in Göppingen.
- 278 -
& 0 R L I T Z (Silesia)
51 10* N. 15 E ; 650 miles: (97,000)
Gorlitz is in the western part of Silesia close to the •industrial region of eastern Saxory. To the S. it is only 10 miles distant from the Czechoslovakian border. It is on the main line from Dresden to the coal fields of Upper Silesia and is a railway centre of importance.
In addition to the industries mentioned below there are a number of cloth factories of no individual importance and minor works m»ki ng agricultural and other machinery.
Transportation
Railway Junction Görlitz (2) The principal line from Dresden through Hirschberg to the Upper Silesian, Polish, and Czechoslovakian coal fields, passes through Görlitz from W. to E.
Two important lines run northwards from the town, one to Cottbus and Berlin and the other to Sorau and eastern Brandenburg. Both of these lines connect Görlitz with the main Dresden-Breslau line 10 miles N. of the town. A further branch line leads southwards from Görlitz to Zittau and Czechoslovakia.
Public Utility Services Görlitz (j)
Municipal Gas Works
In 1936 the municipal gas works made 257 million cubic feet of gas.
Engineering and Armaments
WUMAG
Görlitz (2)
The Waggon & Maschinenbau A.G. Görlitz is an important engineering works making steam turbines, pumps, hydraulic presses, boilers, tanks for water, oil and gas, railway waggons, gun carriages, and other Heavy vehicles including motor ambulances. Diesel engines were also among their products but they are now reported to have suspended production-of these and to be concentrating on steam turbines. There are three separate works belonging to this firm, one occupying a large area in the Northwestern quarter of the town, the second 400 yards to the E. of the first and the third in the Lutherstr. W. of the main railway station. Upwards of 3,000 workers are believed to be employed.
Zeiss Works Görlitz (j) A branch of Carl Zeiss of Jena is reported to have been established at Görlitz and to be producing optical instruments on a large scale. It is believed that this has been done by taking over and extending the works
- 279 -
of the Optische und Feinmechanische Werke Hugo Meyer at Fichtestr. 2 ,formerly makers of components for cameras and cinema apparatus.
G.A.Fischer Brückenstr. (2) This firm is an important producer of a ll kinds of fire-figh tin g appliances and machinery (excluding fire engines).
Approximately 1,000 workers are believed to be employed.
Kosmos
Cottbuserstr. (j)
The Kosmos Rud. Pawlikowski G-.m.b.H. are makers of wood gas generators. They also specialise in conveyors and siftin g machinery.
Karl Dickow Cottbuserstr. ^-) The Apparate & Maschinenfabrik Karl Dickow are makers of centrifugal vacuum pumps.
Richard Raupach Fischerstr. (-) The Richard Raupach Maschinenfabrik & Eisengiesserei G-.m.b.H. have their own ’ foundry and are specialists in ceramic and brick making machinery. ------ oOo— — -
G O S L A R (Hanover) 51° 55* N. 10° 25’ E. 455 miles (24,000) Goslar is situated at the foot of the northern edge of mountains, 25 miles south of Brunswick, on the rich ore deposits of the Harz d istrict. In the v icin ity are smelters producing lead, zinc and copper. In the year 1937 the d istrict contributed 41% of the total German lead production.
The chief producer of lead in the d istrict is the Rammelsberg mine, situated 2 miles south of Goslar, which, when working at fu ll pressure, yields an output of lead concentrates amounting to about 30% of Germany’ s total production; the copper output of this mine, though principally a producer of lead and zinc, is also considerable. The mining company owning the mine, the Unterharzer Berg- u. Hüttenwerke, is a subsidiazy of the Preussische Bergwerks- u. Hütten A.G. which company operates other metal mines in Klausthal and Lautenthal through subsidiazy undertakings .
The mines are scattezdamong the h ills , at Harlingerode to the East, Rammelsberg to the South, and at Klausthal and Lautenthal to the south west. The la tte r two areas are referred to under their own names.
There are a number of small industries such as textile fancy goods, a chemical factory which is mentioned below, and a factory making office requisites which is some note in that branch. At Langelsheim 5 miles to the west is a factozy making chemical products.
- 280 -
Non-Ferrous Metals.
Unterharzer Berg- u. Hüttenwerke G.m.b.H. Oker (j) This firm, a subsidiary of Preussische Bergwerks- u.
Hutten A.G. are important metal producers.
The smelting works, 2 miles east of Goslar, have an estimated capacity of 15,000 metric tons of crude and 15,000 metric tons of refined lead.
The actual output of 1942 was reported to be 9,000 tons. Their annual capacity for production of crude zinc assessed in 1939 at 40,000 tons and of redistilled zinc probably rather lower.
Bleiwerk Goslar. Klausthal (j) The Bleiwerk Goslar G.m.b.H. are important lead fabricators. Their production includes rolled lead, lead pipes and wire, and anti-friction metal.
Hans Heinrich Hütte G.m.b.H. Langelsheim (j) This firm, situated 5 miles NW of Goslar, had an annual production capacity of 12,000 metric tons of refined lead before the war; it has since been reported to have suspended the smelting of lead ores and to be refining scrap metal on a limited scale.
Gebr. Borchers A.-G.
(See under Chemicals.)
Engineering and Armaments.
Fr. Schihke Maschinenfabrik Goslar (-)
This, firm manufacture foundry plant particularly cupolas.
Chemicals & Explosives
Gebrüder Borchers A.G. Glockengiesserstr. (2)
This works is a subsidiary of H.C.Stark, Berlin. In 1939 some 500 workers were employed in two departments a) making borax, cobalt, nickel and arsenic compounds and dyes for the pottery industry; and b) producing tungsten powder at an estimated rate of 200 tons per annum. This works is also an important refiner of cobalt the capacity being in the region of J,000 tons per annum.
-----o0o— ---
- 281 -
G O T H A (Thuringia) . 50° 55« N. 10° 40* Ex 470 miles: (51,000) Gotha is On the main Berlin-Frankfurt a. Main railway lin e and is "between E rfu rt and Eisenach. I t is a junction fo r two branch lin e s. The most important industry of the town is the a irc ra ft assembly works described below. The other industries include rubber hose and engineering, and there are also a number of flour m ills and a soap factory, none of which is of individual importance.
Transportation Railway Junction Gotha (2) The railway sta tio n is on the southern edge of the town. An important branch lin e leads N. from the sta tio n via Mülhausen to Kassel and Northwestern Germany. Another branch lin e leads S. to the Thüringer Wald d is tr ic t. Adjacent to the main railway sta tio n are medium sized railway rep a ir shops engaged on the repair and maintenance of good wagons and coaches and believed to employ about 2,000 workers.
Public U tility Services
9
Power S tation Gotha (2) The &otha e le c tric power sta tio n of the Thüringer E lektrizit& ts Lieferung Ges.
A.G. was originally a power sta tio n of the Gotha tramway system and is now an important sta tio n of the Thuringian network which supplies current fo r general purposes and also for the e le c trifie d railw ay leading from Gotha into the Thüringer Wald. I t has an in sta lle d capacity of approx. 5^MW.
A ircraft and Aero Engines Gothaer Waggonfabrik A.G. Gotha (2) This works is situ ated on the Northeastern edge of the town where i t occupies a very large area. The firm s’ t i t l e is misleading as the larg er part of th is plant i f not i t s e n tire ty is devoted to the manufacture of a irc ra ft components and the assembly of fig h ter a irc ra ft th e ir connection with which dates from the 1914-18 war when the ^otha aeroplane was one of the chief German types.
The a c tiv ity of the Gotha plant has expanded more or less steadily since 1934 when some 3,000 workers were employed. By 1937 that number had increased to 4,000 and by 1939 some 4,500 were employed. Further expansion has occured in the course of th is war.
P rio r to the war a large proportion of th is
- 282
this plant was devoted to th© manufacture of narrow gauge locomotives, trailers and other heavy vehicles. During the early part of this war these activities were continued on a smaller scale and some of the capacity of the plant that became available is believed to have been employed on the manufacture of tank transport vehicles.
There is reason to believe that most of these activities were dragged in the course of the last two to three years and that the plant was practically completely converted for the manufacture of aircraft components and the assembly of aircraft particularly the erection of components and the final assembly of Me. 110.
Prior to a raid by the U.S. Air Force in February, 1944, in the course of which the works was very severely damaged, its estimated output was 7$ Me. 110 per month.
The works also supplies wing sections, fuselage parts etc. to Brunswick and Augsburg.
Engineering and Armaments
Theodor Ehrlich Gotha (j) This firm makes gears, differentials and driving gear.
Brand & Grasemann Paul Hennicke Str. (-) This firm makes ventilators, exhausts and air compressors on a small scale.
Looss & Hempel Gotha (-) The Gothaer Werkzeugmaschinenfabrik Looss & Hempel, are makers of boring and grinding machines.
Automat ikus Am Seeberg (->) The Automatikus Specialfabrik för Apparatebau Eduard Haas, specialises in apparatus for cleansing and scouring metal.
Rubber and Tyres.
Gothania Werke A.G. Hinderiburgstr. ) (j) Blödner & Vuersohrodt Schlichtenstr. ) Both these firms are manufacturers of rubber and woven hose for fire fighting appliances and industrial purposes.
- 283 -
The Vereinigte Gothania Werke A.G. were employing some 250 and. the BlSdner & Vierschrodt Gummiwarenfabrik & Hanfschlauchweberei A. G., some 600 workers in 1939» Both are factories of importance in this branch*
- ___ -oOo — —
284 -
G 6* T T I N G E N (Hannover) 51° 30* N. 9° 55* E: 430 m iles: (47,000) Göttingen is on the main lin e from Hannover to Frankfurt (Main) and is 60 m iles South of the c ity of Hannover. I t is a U niversity to«n and apart from a number of makers of sc ie n tific instruments i t has no industries of note. As a railway junction i t i s of some local importance.
Transportation Railway Repair Shops and Goods Yard Göttingen (3) The rep a ir shops are close to the main railway station on the Western edge of the town. They undertake the repair of goods wagons. Two branch lin es lead to the West and one to the East of Göttingen. A ll of these diverge from the main North to South lin e inside the town area. The goods yards are about 700 yards to the North of the railw ay sta tio n .
Railway Marshalling Yards Göttingen (3) In 1937 the Gottingen railway m arshalling yards had a capacity fo r handling 2,600 wagons per 24 hours.
Public U tility S e rv ic e s Municipal Gas Works Göttingen (3) In 1936 the Municipal Gas Works made 176 cubic fee t of gas.
Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication Al umi rri iTiwerke Göttingen (3) The Aluminiumwerke Göttingen G.nub.H. are makers of al nmi nium goods and light-m etal stampings, pressings and sections.
Engineering and Armaments Sartorius Werke A.G. Weender Landstr. ) Physikalische W erkstätten A. G. Am Z entralfriedhof)(3) Gebrüder Ruhstrat Lange Geismarstr . ) These three associated firms are makers of precision balances,, galvonometers, sc ie n tific instruments and apparatus fo r use in physical, chemical and b io lo g ical lab o ra to rie s. The S artorius Werke also sp ecialise in poultry incubators.
Wilhelm Lambrecht Göttingen (3) This fiim are believed to be the leading German makers of meteorological instruments.
R. Winkel GSttingen (j) This firm make microscopes, surveying and high-precision grinding and polishing machines.
—— QOO————
G R E I F F E N B E R G (Silesia) 51° N. 15° 30» E: 690 miles (.4,500) Greiffenberg is approximately 20 miles South East of Gorlitz on the main lin e through Hirschberg to Upper S ile sia . I t is within 10 miles of the former Czechoslovakian fro n tie r. The industry is mainly te x tile and the larg est factory is mentioned below.
T extiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper Greiffwerke, A.G. Winkler Greiffenberg (-) This firm, formerly the Greiffwerke A.G., is now owned by the Gustav Winkler K.G. of Berlin.
In 1939 i t specialised in the manufacture of overalls and workmen’s clothing, and employed some 1,600 workers. There is a branch factory at Frankfort/Oder. -------oOo------
G R E IF S W A L D (Pomerania) 54° 51 N. 13° 25* E: 590 miles: (34,000) Greifswald is a small U niversity town 20 miles South East of Stralsund and close to the B altic, with which i t i s connected by a canal. There is a small shipbuilding industry and a few engineering works, none of which is of outstanding importance. A report has been received that there is now a factory outside the town making aero-engines, but confirmation or fu rth er detai 1 s are 1 anking.
- 286 -
G R E I Z (Thuringia) 500 40* Ne 12° io» E: 540 m iles: (40,000) Greiz i s 12 m iles North, of Plauen in the small p rin c ip a lity of Reuss. I t has a considerable te x tile industry made up of a number of small fa c to rie s, several minor engineering firm s, and the chemical factory mentioned below.
Engineering and Armaments Oskar Schleicher Greiz ( -) This firm , which has i t s own iron foundry formerly specialised in the making of te x tile machinery. I t s present a c tiv itie s are not known.
Chemicals and Explosives Zschimmer & Schwarz Dblau (-) These chemical works are in the suburb of D&Lau one mile South of Greiz. They produce formic acid., aluminium and barium compounds, te x tile dressings and various in d u strial chemicals, and pharmaceuticals. In 1939 the firm employed some 400 workers.
Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper Muller & Kramer Admiral Scheer S tr.(-) In 1938 th is firm employed some 400 workers.
I t i s one of the several small weaving m ills in G reiz.
Georg Schieber x Greiz ( -) The Färbereien & Appreturanstalten Georg Schieber A.G. are dyers and te x tile fin ish e rs. At th e ir two fac to rie s in Greiz and in Reichenbach (Saxony) a town 5 miles East of Greiz, they employed some 1,200 workers in 1938*
- 287 -
G R E V E N B R O IC H (Rhineland) 51° 5* N. 6° 35* E: 295miles: (12,000) Grevenbroich is approximately 12 miles South West of Dusseldorf and is a railway junction where the lin e from Neuss to Duren crosses that from K!51n to Mttnchen-Gladbach, The chief industry is the important aluminium works mentioned below. There are, in addition, several foundries and engineering works and some te x tile facto ries, none of which is individually of note.
Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication Erftwerk Grevenbroich (2) The Erftwerk which belongs to the Vereinigte Aluminium Werke A.G., is an important aluminium reduction plant with a pre-war capacity of 25,000 tons of aluminium per annum. 4,000 workers are believed to be employed. According to estimates as per September 1943 the capacity of th is plant has remained at i t s pre-war le v e l.
B lattm etall A.G. Grevenbroich (3) The Rheinische Blattm etaH A.G., which also belongs to the VAWAG, specialises in the manufacture of aluminium fo il.
G. Schottler . Grevenbroich (-) The Armaturenfabrik & M etallgiesserei G.
Schottler are metal founders and makers of non-ferrous armatures.
Engineering and Armaments Maschinenfabrik Grevenbroich A. G. Grevenbroich (-) The Maschinenfabrik Grevenbroich A.H. belongs to the R. Wolf concern of Magdeburg-Buckau and is a factory making brewing vats and other enamelled metal containers fo r in d u stria l use. -------o0o------
G R O N A U (Westphalia) 52° 15* N. 7° E: 310 miles: (20,000) Gronau is 30 miles north-west of Münster and close to the Dutch border. I t is on one of the main railway lin e s leading from N.W. Germany into Holland. Cotton spinning is the chief industry of th is town.
288
Transportat ion
Railway Repair Shops Gronau (3) These are median sized works which undertake the repair of goods wagons, and which in 1937 employed some 75° workers.
Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper
Gronau A. G.- Losserstr. (-) The Baumwollspinnerei Gronau A.G. is the largest of several spinning mills in Gronau. This factory has L£,000 spindles and in 1937 employed approximately 1,000 workers.
---0O0---
GROSS KAYNA.
See under Weissenfels.
— -0O0---
GR&NEERG (Silesia)
51° 55» N. 15° 30» E: 67O miles: (26,000) Grühberg is in the northernmost part of Silesia and is on the main railway line leading from Stettin to Glogau and Breslau. It is a junction for two small branch lines. Textiles are the main industzy of the town there are a number of small brown coal deposits in the neighbourhood. Grünberg is also the centre of a small winegrowing district and has several distilleries. There are a few brick factories and an uninportant engineering works.
Transportation
Railway Repair Shops Grünberg (3) These are medium sized repair shops which carry out the repair of goods wagons. In 1937 some 750 workers were employed.
Solid Fuels
Grünberger Gruben Grönberg (-) The Consolidierte Grünberger Grüben exploit the small brown coal deposits near Grünberg and have a briquette factory. 80% of the shares are owned by the textile works mentioned below.
Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper Deutsche Wollenwaren Breslauerstr. (3) The Deutsche Wollenwaren Manufaktur A.G. is the
- 289 -
principal te x tile factory of Gronau. The main products are heavy te x tile m aterials such as uniform cloth. There are 480 weaving stools and a spinning m ill with 24,000 spindles.
Some 2,000 workers were employed in 1939. ----oOo----
G U B E N (Brandenburg) 51° 55* N. 14° AD* E: 640 miles: (A4,000) Guben is 25 miles South of Frankfort/Oder on one of the main lin e s leading from North Germany to Breslau. T extiles are the chief industry. There are a number of cloth fac to rie s and Guben is an important centre of the hat-making industry. In addition to the new factory mentioned below, there are a number of minor engineering works.
Transportation Railway Junction. Guben (j) Important branches leave the main lin e a t Guben leading to Cottbus in the South West and through Crossen Eastwards to Posen.
Engineering and Armaments Borsig A.G. Guben (-) The Rheinmetall Borsig A.G. have b u ilt a new factory during the war a t Guben, which is believed to have been completed in March 1943. These works are reported to employ 800 workers but i t is not known what is being produced.
T extiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper Hutfabrik A.G. Guben (-) The Berlin-Gubener Hutfabrik A.G. are among the leading German manufacturers of f e l t and cloth hats. P rio r to the war they did a large export trade. Some J ,000 workers were employed in 1939.
The present a c tiv itie s of th is large works are not known.
----oOo-—
GUMBINNEN (East Prussia) 54° 35' N. 22° 10’ E: 950 miles: (25,000) Gumbinnen is on the main lin e from Königsberg to Kowno and Riga. I t is 25 miles from the former Lithuanian fro n tie r and was a garrison town. I t is an important market centre fo r the agriculture of East Prussia.
- 290 -
Engineering and Armaments
Maschinenfabrik A.G. Königstr. (3) The Vereinigte Maschinenfabrik A.G. Gumbinnen is an old-established firm manufacturing agricultural machinery. Among their products are small Diesel and crude oil engines. In 1939 the works were employing some 400 workers.
Reports suggest that a large part of the works is now engaged on the manufacture of tools and components for the motor-vehicle industry and that 1,000 workers were employed in 1942.
Food Stuffs
Prangmöhlen A.G, Gumbinnen (-) These flour mills have a daily milling capacity of 200 tons and large grain-storage facilities.
There are also several smaller flour, mills in Gumbinnen with a total milling capacity of approximately 150 tons per day.
---0O0-—
GUMMERSBACH (Rhineland)
51° 5* N. 7° 35* E: 335 miles: (21,000) Gummersbach is 23 miles E. of Koln in the hilly country known as the Bergisch-Land. To the North and East of the town are numerous small river valleys where artificial reservoirs have been farmed as part of the water supply system for the Wuppertal and Solingen districts» Gummersbach is the administrative centre for many these water supply undertakings.
There are also numerous quarries in the vicinity. The principal industry of the town is the important boiler works described below.
i
Transportation
Railway Repair Shops Gummersbach (3) These are medium-sized repair shops carrying out the repair of goods wagons.
Engineering and Armaments
L. & S. Steinm&ller Gummersbach (2) These large works are among the leading German makers of boilers, mechanical stokers, and general industrial plant. They are believed to be important builders of locomotive boilers. The works cover a large area in the western quarter of the town and several thousand workers are employed» Ground reports suggest that as from 1941 Steinmtlller was working to full capacity.
- 291 -
Arms Factory Gummersbach (-) I t has been reported th at a large new arms factory has been opened a t Gummersbach where some 8,000 workers are employed« The workshops are said to have been b u ilt largely underground. No confirmation or d e ta ils of the products of th is factory have been received.
— oOo™
G Ü ST R O W (Mecklenburg^ 53° $0» N. 12° 10» E: 540 miles: (26,000) Gustrow is 20 miles S. of Rostock and is on the main lines from B erlin to Rostock and Warnemunde and from B erlin to Lubeck, which diverge two miles W. of the town. There are a number of smell engineering works in addition to th at mentioned below, but the main a c tiv itie s of the town are connected with ag ricu ltu re.
Engineering and Armaments Vantongel G&strow (-) The Vantongelsche Stahlwerke G.m.b.H. specialise in ste e l mould castings. In 1938 the factory employed about J50 workers.
— oOo-—
GÜTERSLOH (Westphalia) 51° 55' N. 8° 20' Es J70 miles: (30,000) Gütersloh is on the main railway lin e between Bielefeld and Hamm. T extiles are the chief industry. There are a number of cotton and rayon weaving m ills, none of which is * individually of note, and several small engineering works in addition to the larger one which is mentioned below.
Transporta tio n
tay Repair Shops Gdtersloh (3) These are medium sized rep air shops engaged on the rep air of goods wagons.
Engineering and Armaments Mielewerk A.G. Gutersloh (3) These works employed some 2,500 workers in 1939 and produced dairy machinery, washing and wringing machines, re frig e ra to rs, small e le c tric motors and bicycle lamps and components. In 1942 they were reported to be fu lly activ e.
- 292 -
H A G E N and D I S T R I C T (Westphalia) 51° 20» N. 7° JO* E .: 325 miles: (234,OOo) The d is tr ic t of Hagen covers a stre tc h of the valleys of the rivers Ennepe, Volme and Lenne. I t has a to ta l area of approximately 100 sq. m iles, and includes the following main towns, suburbs and neighbouring v illa g e s:- Hagen with a population of 155,000 includes Boele, Delstern, Hengstey, Kabel, Haspe, Holthausen and Vorhalle.
Gevelsberg. w tt " 23,000 Schwelm it It * 24,000 Hasslinghausen ” It " 12,000 ihcludes Asbeck, Hiddinghausen, Grundschhttel & Volmarstein.
Milspe ' w w " 11,700 includes Möhlinghausen.
Voerde tt tt ** • 8,600 234,300
includes a ll surrounding v illag es.
The city of Hagen lie s a t the confluence of the River Volme, a trib u tary of the Ruhr, and the River Ennepe, 10 miles due South of Dortmund a t the South-East end of -the Ruhr area. I t is one of the most flourishing commercial c itie s in Westphalia, possessing extensive iron and s te e l work^ manufacturers of iron and ste e l goods, accumulators, leath er, paper and tobacco as well as te x tile .mill s , breweries, d i s t i ll e r i e s , and other in d u strial establishm ents.
Transportation f a c ilitie s a t Hagen play an important p art in the commercial tra ffic network of the Ruhr and Western Germany. There are extensive marshal lin g yards, goods statio n s and repair workshops.
THE AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVES. LOCATION PRIORITY
-------~ -------------------------------------- ~~ , RATING
Transportation.
Railway sidings & m arshalling yards. Hagen (2) t These sidings and marshalling yards have two roundhouses. They are situ ated to the North of the city and ju st N.N.W. of the main passenger statio n . An extensive factory area surrounds these yards.
Railway Repair Shops. Hagen. (3) These rep air shops, with two roundhouses, lie d irectly North, North East of the m arshalling yards mentioned above. They are reported to be engaged on the repair of goods waggons.
Railway Marshalling Yards. Hagen- Vorhalle (3) To the North West of Hagen c ity , p rac tic a lly on the southern bank of the River Ruhr are the- Vorhalle marshalling yards with 2 locomotive sheds
- 293 -
and 2 turntables and a pre-war capacity of 3,800 waggons per 24 hours.
Railway Marshalling Yards Hagen-Hengstey (3) These yards are situated in the northernmost suburb of Hagen, and stretch along the southern bank of the Riber Ruhr. They had a pre-war capacity of 2,350 waggons per 24 hours.
Public Utility
For Hengstey, Herdecke, and Harkort reservoirs and power stations see under WITTEN.
Kraftwerk Hagen-Haspe (3) This thermal power-station is owned by the Klöckner Werke A. G. and has a capacity of 40 MW.
Kraftwerk Gevelsberg (3) This municipal plant is a thermal power station with a capacity of 36 MW.
Gaswerke Hagen (3) In 1936 the Hagen municipal gasworks purchased Go million cubic feet of gas and sold 38O million cubic feet.
Gaswerke Hagen-Gevelsberg (3) In 1936 the Gevelsberg municipal gasworks purchased and sold 209 million cubic feet of gas.
Iron and Steel and Ferro-Alloys.
Kltfckner-Werke A.G. Hagen-Haspe (2)
This is a branch plant of the main works at Duisburg. It covers a fairly large site at Haspe, a South West suburb of Hagen, and lies between the Hagen-Barmen and the Hagen- Gevelsberg railway lines. The engineering section of the plant lies in the North East part, of the site and details of it are given below in the Engineering section. The blast furnaces and electric furnaces lie in the South West end of the site. Annual capacity is estimated at 450,000 tons of pig-iron and 600,000 tons of crude steel. Thomas, open-hearth and electric steel is made. The plant is estimated to employ some 8,000 workers.
Non-Ferrous Metals
Erkenzweig u. Schwemann Hagen (3) This is a copper fabricating plant of relatively minor importance.
- 294
Engineering and Armaments
Klöckner-Werke A.G. Hagen-Haspe (2) The engineering section of this works lies in N.E. part of the site. It is engaged mainly in the production of sheets, bars, hoops, plates, joints and wire. See also under "Iron and Steel".
Gusstahlwerk Wittmann A.G. Hagen-Haspe (3) In 1938, the plant of this firm consisted of a steel foundry, machine and fitting shops. Some 1,300 workers were then employed, A 1942 report gives the number of workers as 3,000.
Stahlwerk Brttninghaus A.G. Hagen- (3) Vorhalle
The suburb of Vorhalle lies to the N.W. of Hagen just south of the Biver Ruhr. The Brüninghaus plant, owned by Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G», is situated directly north of the Vorhalle station within a triangle formed by these main railway lines. It has rolling mills and produces, bars, sheets, steel rods and girders and other products.
Stahlwerke Harkort-Eicken G. nub. H. Hagen (3) .
Owned by Hoesch A. G» , this plant is situated between the East bank of the River Volme and the Hagen main railway station. It has rolling mills and produces, rods, bars, sheets, plates and wire. In 1939, its workers numbered 2,200.
Sohmiedag A.G» Hagen (2) Owned by Hoesch A. Gw this plant lies on both banks of the Biver Volme to the N.W. of the railway marshalling yards. Besides making crankshafts, forgings for mines, machinery and dredges, fittings for locomotives, boilers, and drums, this works is reported to be producing 155 nm cannon, bombs, axles for Ford oars and it is also believed to be engaged in the partial assembly of tanks. Some 2,500 workers are reported to be employed.
- 295 -
W. Krefft A.G. Gevelsberg (J) Prior to the war, these works were inportant makers of domestic ovens, heating apparatus and associated products. In 1939 they employed sane 1 ,400 workers. They are now reported to be making small arms components.
Schwelmer Eiseiwerk ^filler & Co. Schwelm (J) Covering an area of approx. 150,000 sq. metres on a site of some 200,000 sq. metres, this plant is engaged in the production of tank waggons, oil and other storage tanks, and benzine drums.
According to ground reports sone 1 ,500 workers were employed in 1942 but it is believed that this number has since decreased.
Hagener Gusstahlwerke Remy & Co. G.m.b.H. Hagen (3) This steel processing plant occupies a fairly extensive site directly North North East of the main marshalling yards in the suburb cf Eckesey.
Adjoining the northern section of the plant is the municipal cleaning-vehicle depot. The plant has rolling mills, and produces sheets, plate bars and rods.
Milspe Eisenwerke vormals Rudolf Gevelsberg- (3) Rentrop & Co. Milspe This plant, built on a .site of 24,000 square metres consists of a foundry smelting ovens, tempering ovens and workshops coverii^ an area of 7>000 square metres. Producers of agricultural machinery before the war, this firm, together with the smaller firm of Stockey & Smith lying on the other side of the railway bridge . linking Gevelsberg to Milspe, is said to be making jigs and fixtures for the arms industry and the two firms are reported to employ sone 1 ,000 workers.
Heinrich Herring und Sohn Milspe (-) This is a small firm making foundry mnnldlr^g machines.
- 296 -
Dorken A.G. Gevelsberg (-)
Owned by Hoesoh A. G., this plant specialises in M.V. components, components for railway tracks and waggons. These components include plates, bolts and malleable castings.
In 1939 some 4-00 workers were employed.
Accumulatoren-Fabrik A.G, Hagen (1) (A.F.A.) Werk Hagen
This is the Hagen plant of the Accumulatoren Fabrik, A.G. Berlin (A.F.A.). It stretches along the northern bank of the River Ennepe to the west of Hagen in the suburb of Wehringhausen and is the largest plant of its kind in Germany. Ships* accumulators, particularly for submarines (these latter constituting 50% of Germany’s total requirements), of all sizes, fire-control instruments, electric firing mechanisms, lead and alkali-nickel-iron accumulators, Edison pattern, and accumulators for power and radio installations are made.
The plant has its own power station linked to the municipal station and is estimated to employ more than 5,000 workers.
Stahlwerk Kabel 0. Pouplier jun, Hagen-Kabel (3)
Situated N. of Hagen in the suburb of Kabel just south of the Hengstey marshalling yards, this plant produces semi-finished steel components for .aircraft and tanks.
Wippermann junior A.G. Hagen-Delstern (3)
This works, which before the war made components for motor vehicles, is now reported to be one of the largest makers of components for caterpillar tracks in Germany and also stated to be making sparking plugs.
Maschinen und Werkzeugfabrik Kabel, Hagen-Kabel (-) Vogel & Sohemmann, A.G,
This company are manufacturers of foundry machines, precision instruments, particularly spiral borers, sand-blast equipment, and fettling shop equipment.
H» Breitenbach vorm. Heitman & Co. Gevelsberg J (-) Elektrolytische Verzinkereien G,m.b.H. Gevelsberg Breibaoh*sche Verzinkerei Hagen Elektrolytische Verzinkereien ) Hermann Schulze Hagen ) Spritzverzinkerei W. Schaft K.G» Hagen J Thflnken & Co. K.G. Hagen ) The aforementioned galvanizing works are the largest of a considerable number of works of this kind in the Hagen region.
None is of individual importance.
Chemicals
I.G. Parbenindustrie jUG. Hagen-Haspe (-) This plant is reported to have been dismantled. It had a capacity of 5-10,000 tons of 100^ sulphuric acid per annum.
Bergische-Sprengstoff und Beyenburg- Zunderwerke A.G. near Schwelm (-) Puses and Detonators are made by this firm on a small scale. In 19J8 some 250 workers were employed.
- 298 -
HAINICHEN (Saxony)
51° N. 13° 10’ E: 570 miles: (8,200) Hainichen is 15 miles N.E. of Chemnitz. Apart from the motor works described, below its industry is mainly concerned with textiles, embracing upholstery, bandages, and cotton-wool.
None of the factories is individually of importance.
TSPE AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVES LOCATION . PRIORITY
RATING
Engineering and Armaments.
Frame Werke G-.m.b.H* Hainichen (3) »
Before the war this firm made small three- and four-wheeled vehicles of the delivery-van type, the largest type being a one-ton truck* Their products now include small troop carriers suitable for cross country work*
- - ——oOo— —
HALBERSTADT
51° 55’ N. 11° E: 480 miles: (55,000) Halberstadt is 25 miles to the S.W. of Magdeburg on the plain immediately to the N. of the Hartz Mountains. It is on a main East to West railway line connecting it directly with Aschersleben and Bemburg which are approximately 25 miles and 40 miles respectively to the East of Halberstadt. The normal peace-time industries of the town included glove making, the manufacture of sausages, and the preserving of meat, but the war-time industry is centred on the important Junkers aircraft works described below.
AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVES LOCATION PRIORITY
Transportation
Railway Junction „ Halberstadt (3)
Immediately to the W. of the main railway station a branch line Reaves the maitrEast to West track and leads to Magdeburg; East of the main station another branch diverges, leading into the Hartz district.
Marshall npg Yards Halberstadt (3)
These lie to the North East of . the town and had, in 1938, a capacity of 2, 200 wagons per 24 hours.
Public Utility Services,
Städtisches Gaswerk Halberstadt (3)
In 1936 the municipal gasworks of Halberstadt made 174 million cubic feet of gas*
- 299 -
HALBERSTADT (Contd) TIES AND DESCRIPTION OF
OBJECTIVES
Aircraft and Aero-Engines Junkers Flugzeug & Motoren­ werke A.G-.
LOCATION PRIORITY
SATB&
Halberstadt (2)
The Junkers concern has important works in Halberstadt which have been greatly enlarged during the war and are now reported to be employing up to 10,000 workers. The original factory is reported to be concentrated almost entirely on Ju. 88 wings which are sent for assembly to Bernburg. In 1943 , they were turning out 21 sets of these weekly, fuselages for these plants being produced at the same rate in Aschersleben.
Junkers Flugzeug & Motoren Halberstadt (3) werke A.G.
It is reported that during the war a large aeroengine factory has been developed by Junkers in Halberstadt. The premises of an existing machine factory (The Halberstadter Maschinenfabrik) were taken over and the plant has been modernised and greatly extended. This has not been confirmed.
KAUF, (Province Saxony) 51° JO' N. 12° E: 520 miles: (210,000) Halle’ is a railway centre of great importance. It is on the main line from Berlin to Frankfort/Main and together with Leipzig which is 20 miles to the S.E. it forms the focal point of the railway system of industrial Saxony.
Apart from the railway workshops and the aeroplane factory described below, the industry of Halle is mostly in the hands of small firms and includes engineering works, metal foundries, printing and furniture making. To the North and South of the town are large brown-coal deposits and the firms exploiting these have their head offices in Halle.
Halle is a compact and densely populated town. A large proportion of the population work in or in connection with the outlying districts. There are two highly important works, within 10 miles of and to the South of Halle: the Leuna works at Merseburg and the Buna works at Schkopau. At Teutschenthal 10 miles to the West there is a notable non-ferrous metal works. All these are dealt with under their separate headings.
The small suburb of Ammendorf, 1 mile to the South of Halle, is not inside the administrative area, and is dealt with separately.
Transportation^
4
- 300 -
HALLE (Contd)
HEE AND INSCRIPTION QB1 OBJECTIVES LOCATION PRIORITY
RATING-
Transportation
Railway Junction Hallo (1)
The main Berlin-Frankfort line approaches Halle from the East and 1 mile before reaching the town is Joined by important branches leading respectively from Magdeburg and, from Torgau. Immediately before the main Halle station it is Joined by a further branch leading from Halberstadt and Aschersleben. The track curves and* ruhs roughly North to South along the Western edge of the town. South of the main station the lines again diverge, one important branch leading Southeast to Leipzig and a second West to Eisleben.
A small local branch line also leads from the main station across the town and the river Saale and Westwards via Hettstedt to Eisleben.
Marshalling Yards Halle (2)
The goods station and the extensive marshalling yards are adjacent to and North of the main station. The traffic is important not only because of the mazy brown-coal mines surrounding Halle but also because of the town* s proximity to the large Leuna works at Merseburg and the Buna plant- at Schkopau. In 1938 these yards had a capacity of 4,800 wagons per 24 hours.
Railway Repair Shops Halle (2)
These are important railway repair shops and are $outh of and close to the main station. They repair locomotives and rolling stock and are believed to employ some 3,000 workers.
Publio Utility Services Power Station Halle (2 ) This municipal thermal power station, planned to have an ultimate capacity of 8Ö W , was only half built in 19387" It contains 4 generators with an installed capacity of 42 W . No information is available regarding the possible further development of this plant.
Werke der Stadt Halle A.G-. Halle (2)
In 193$ this gas works made 490 million cubic feet «of gas and drew 20 million cu.ft. from the munoipal sewage-purification plant.
- 301 -
Aircraft and. Aero Engines
Siebel
Halle (1)
The Siebel Flugzeugwerk Halle is a large aircraft plant situated, on the airfield North of the town. At the outbreak of war they were engaged on their own type of two-engine plane, but they are now assembling mainly Ju. 88*s. Wings and control surfaces are made at the Halle works to meet their own ‘ requirements but this type of aircraft component is also supplied to the Siebel works at Schkeuditz. Fuselage components are imported from the Opel works at Russelsheim. Components are also received from and supplied to the Henschel works at Berlin and the A.T.G. works at Leipzig.
Engineering and Armaments
Weise Sohne Turnstr. ) Weise & Monski Merseburg- ) (3) erstr. )
These two associated firms are makers of pumps and turbines. Weise & Monski is aa old-established firm specialising in slow- moving piston pumps. Weise Sohne have a more modern plant and manufacture high­ speed centrifugal pumps and domestic pumping plants. They employ some 800 workers before the war.
I?ohrenwerke A. G. Bollbwrgerweg (3)
The Hallesche RÄhrenwerke A.G., which employed 300 workers in 1939, manufacture pipes from sheet steel for ventilators and air ducts. They are s^Lso pipe holders and makers of ribbed pipes for refrigeration purposes. The firm belongs to the Neunkirchener Eisenwerk A. G.
Lange & Geilen Raffineriestr. (3)
This firm are important makers of planing and shaping machines and particularly of tool-room shapes.
F.Pampe Artilleriestr. (-)
This firm specialises in distilling apparatus for the chemical industry and synthetic-alcohol manufacture.
About 150 workers were employed in 1939.
Wegelin/
- 302 -
HAILE (Contd) TYPE AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVES
Engineering and Armaments ( Contd) Wegelin & Hübner A.G.
LOCATION PRIORITY
'RATINE
M erseburger- s t r .
(3 )
T his firm makes f i l t e r p re s s e s , h y d ra u lic p re s s e s , d i s t i l l i n g p la n ts , vacuum pumps and com pressors, and complete i n s t a l l a t i o n s f o r th e chem ical and rayon in d u s try . The works in clu d e an iro n foundry. A pproxim ately 1,000 workers were employed in 1939, the company having in c re a se d i t s a c t i v i t y co n sid erab ly d u ring th e p rev io u s th re e y e a rs.
H allesche M aschinenfabrik M erseburger- (3) s t r .
The H alle sehe M aschinenfabrik & E ise n g ie s s e re i A.G. s p e c ia lis e in complete p la n ts f o r su g ar r e f i n e r i e s .
They also make pumps, f i l t e r p re sse s and r e f r ig e r a tin g m achines. Some 700 workers were employed in 1939.
Chemicals and E xplosive Theo.GoldSchmidt A.G. H alle T his chem ical fa c to ry , which was form erly known as th e Chemische F abrik Buckau, i s an e le c tro -c h e m ic a l works producing c a u s tic soda and potash , ch lo rin e and c h lo rin e d e riv a tiv e s . The works a re on a la rg e scale and are equipped w ith th e most modern types of g a lv a n ic tan k s and ch lo rin e liq u e fy in g p la n ts . The p a re n t • works o f t h i s firm are in E ssen . There i s a th ir d la rg e chem ical works belonging to the same concern a t. Mannheim.
(3 )
- 303 -
HAMBURG
(in c lu d in g ALTONA and HARBURG-WILHELMSBURG) 53° 35’ N. 10° E: 450 m ile s (1 ,7 0 0 ,0 0 0 )
Hamburg h a s , f o r a c o n s id e ra b le tim e , held th e f i r s t p la c e among th e p o r ts o f C o n tin e n ta l E u ro p e, and h a s r is e n to be th e t h i r d l a r g e s t s h ip p in g c e n tr e in th e w o rld . T h is developm ent i s due n o t o n ly to th e v a s t e x te n s io n s and th e m o d e rn is a tio n s o f i t s Free P o r t , b u t a ls o to th e e x c e p tio n a l f a c i l i t i e s o f f e r e d f o r s t o r i n g and m a n ip u la tin g g o o d s .in bond - n o ta b ly c o lo n ia l produce and o i l .
Hamburg’ s se a -g o in g m erch an t f l e e t c o u n te d , on Ja n u a ry 1 s t 1937, 1,536 s h ip s , w ith an a g g re ­ g a te of 2 ,2 7 5 ,0 0 0 G.R.T.
D uring 1936, th e p o r t ’ s incom ing and o u t­ go in g t r a f f i c each amounted to 20-g- m il li o n to n s n e t , w h ile im p o rts o f goods reach ed 18 m illio n to n s , and e x p o rts 7 i m il li o n to n s .
The old p o r t was c o n fin e d to th e n o rth e rn sid e o f th e R iv e r E lb e , b u t th e r e a l l y im p o rta n t and modern p o r t h a s d eveloped e n t i r e l y a lo n g th e r i v e r ’ s s o u th e rn b a n k ,. T h is m ain p o r t a re a f a l l s ro u g h ly i n to two s e c tio n s ( a ) c e n tr e d on th e HANSA-HAFEN and (b) on the ODER-HAFEN,. which pro­ v id e accom m odation f o r th e c h ie f o v e rse a s l i n e r s .
In th e new p o r t to o a re th e b ig s h ip b u ild in g y a rd s , And num erous e n g in e e rin g and armament w orks.
B e sid es p l a n t s c o n n ected w ith s h ip b u ild in g , th e p o r t a re a accom modates o th e r b ig e n g in e e rin g works and ro u g h ly h a lf o f Hamburg’ s vei?y im p o rtan t o i l - s t o r a g e i n s t a l l a t i o n s ( t o t a l p re -w a r c a p a c ity o v e r 1 ,3 0 0 ,0 0 0 t o n s ) , o i l- c r u s h i n g m i l l s , non­ f e r r o u s m e ta l w o rks, s e v e r a l a i r c r a f t and a i r c r a f t component f a c t o r i e s in c lu d in g im p o rta n t a irs c re w w orks, a s ,w e ll a s g r a in , and o th e r f o o d s tu f f f a c t o r i e s and s to r a g e c e n tr e s .
Next in im p o rtan ce to th e p o r t p ro p e r comes th e H arburg-W ilhelm sburg d i s t r i c t , to th e S o u th , where b ig v e g e ta b le - o il p l a n t s , o th e r fo o d ­ p ro c e s s in g f a c t o r i e s , th e huge g r a in and produce w arehouses, chem ical w orks an d -a w ell-know n rubber­ ty r e f a c t o r y a re lo c a te d .
A lto n a , on th e n o rth e rn bank o f th e E lb e , s p e c i a l i s e s more in l i g h t m e ta l i n d u s t r i e s , in c lu d in g c a s t i n g s f o r a e r o - e n g in e s , b u t h a s a ls o s e v e r a l o th e r im p o rta n t i n d u s t r i e s and fo o d - s to r a g e i n s t a l l a t i o n s . In th e i-n n er p o r t (B in n e n h a fe n -S a n d to rh a fe n ), a ls o on th e A lto n a s i d e .o f th e p o r t , l i e s th e v e ry c o n g e ste d c h ie f w arehouse a re a . K h e t of ra ilw a y tr a c k s connects t h i s a re a w ith th e Main S ta tio n o f Hamburg. ‘
-3Qt-
One o f th e s t r i k i n g f e a t u r e s o f th e c e n t r a l r e s i d e n t i a l and com m ercial a re a o f th e c i t y p ro p e r i s th e A ls te r Lake ( a c t u a l l y a w idened arm o f th e R iv er g i b e ) . The m a jo r (n o rth e rn ) p o r tio n o f t h i s lak e i s known ä s th e Au's seri-A l s t e r ( o u te r A l s t e r ) , and th e much s m a lle r and n a rro w e r so u th e rn t i p i s c a lle d th e B in n e n -A ls te r ( in n e r A l s t e r ) . C ro ssin g th is p o r tio n i s th ö Lombard b r id g e , w hich form s (o r form ed) th e s o le c o n n e c tin g lin k betw een th e b u s in e s s d i s t r i c t o f th e c i t y and th e la r g e r e s i d e n t i a l d i s t r i c t to th e W est. The whole o f th e B in n e n -A lste r i s now cam ouflaged.
A p art from th e i n d u s t r ie s and w arehouses lo c a te d in th e p o r t a r e a , A lto n a , and H arb u rg - W ilhelm sburg, th e re a re num erous w orks, s to ra g e i n s t a l l a t i o n s , e t c . s c a t t e r e d a b o u t o th e r d i s t r i c t ^ of g r e a te r Hamburg.
The ra ilw a y system in c lu d e s n in e m ajor com­ p le x e s of goods s t a t i o n s , m a r s h a llin g y a rd s , and s id in g s . Of t h e s e , f i v e a r e s i t u a t e d i n , o r a d ja c e n t to , tjje p o r t a r e a . A s i x t h l i e s to th e S o u th o f the Sudjer-Elbe ( o u ts id e th e p o r t p ro p e r) s t r e t c h i n g f o r about 7 km ., ro u g h ly N o rth to S o u th , a lo n g the so u th ern o u t s k i r t s o f H arb u rg , betw een th e Gutmoor and th e W ils to r f -R onneburg d i s t r i c t .
The rem ain in g th r e e goods y a rd s e tc . a re in the A lto n a , S t e l l i n g e n , and Barmbeck a r e a s . A ll a re connected w ith th e Hamburg C e n tra l S ta tio n .
At th e end o f 1936 th e ra ilw a y -n e t m easured 138 km ., th e tramway system 232 km.
f
T ra n sp o rta tio n Goods and M a rsh a llin g Y ards H arburg-W ilhelm sburg (3 ) The c a p a c ity o f t h i s y ard i s U,800 waggons p e r 2U h o u rs. T h is netw ork runs N o rth -S o u th and l i e s West p f W ilhelm sburg town and s t a t i o n . The l i n e s le a d in g o u t o f th b y a rd s to th e N o rth co n n ect w ith th e V eddel Z o llh a fe n and th e S p ree-H afen . To th e S outh th e y a rd s go a l i t t l e below W ilhelm sburg s t a t i o n .
Goods and M a rsh a llin g Y ards R o th e n b u rg so rt (3) (B illw a rd e r A u ssch lag )
The c a p a c ity o f t h i s y a rd i s 3 ,3 0 0 waggons p e r 2U h o u rs. The l in e s run from B illb r a c k in a s o u th ­ e a s t e r l y d i r e c t i o n a s f a r a s T i e f - s ta c k s t a t i o n ( a d is ta n c e o f a b o u t 2 j km .) .
-305-
Transportation (cont)
Goods Yard Hamburg-Sud, (3) Kleiner Grasbrook
Starting a little East of the Kaiser Wilhelm Hafen, the yard stretches almost due West to East for a distance of about 1J km. ending in the Southern part of the Hansa Hafen.
Goods Yard Oberhafen, (3) Hamburg-Alt stadt
About 1J km. in length (East to West) North of the Baken Hafen, this goods yard connects, by a t bridge over the Bill Hafen, with the Rothenburgsort goods yard.
Marshalling Yards, Railway Hamburg-Gutmoor (2) Workshops, and Sidinga These yards consist of a stretch of about 7 km. of sidings, goods yardSj etc. from Marckelf^ld, in the South, to just short of the Süder-Elbe, in the North (between the Gutmoor and Ronneburg districts).
Junction, Goods Yard, and Rolling-stock sheds Altona (3) These are situated in the*North- west of Altona; they consist of a cross-shaped net of lines; those going North connect with the Stellingen-Langenfelde goods yards.
Goods Yard Stellingen-Langenfelde (3) This yard lies North-West of Altona and West of the suburbs of Stellingen and Langenfelde. It'is nearly 2 km. in length.
Goods Yards and Sheds of Barmbeck (3) the7 elevated railway This is a small yard situated between the Winterhude town park and the suburb of Barmbeck, North­ west of the Alster.
Public Utility Services ElektrifljitStswerke Tief stack (2)
Owned by the Hamburgische Elektricitats-Werke A. G., this thermal power ^station is one of the two mai£ generating stations supplying the city of Hamburg. It is situated in
-306-
Public Utility Services Elektrizitätswerke (cont) Tiefstack (2) the docks area to the East of the town where the Elbe-Bille and the Moorflethen canals join the Holzhafen. Built in 1915, it has recently been ex­ tended by the addition of very high-pressure boilers and super­ imposed turbines. The station supplies steam to a district- heating system mainly for the surrounding area of Bille. It has an installed capacity of 129 MW.
There are no long-distance supplies but there is a substation for 25 XV and 30 kV 3-phase A-C. and also for b.C. Supplies are given to the tramway systdm, to parts of the inner towns, to the elevated rail­ ways, and the local State railways.
There are 25 kV underground cables connecting to Bille, Barmbeck, and Carolinenstraase; and 30 kV lines connecting to Bergedorf and to Lubeck via Bargeteheide. The station is also connected to the Neuhof generating station.
Elektrizitätswerke Neuhof (2) This thermal power station, also owned by the Hamburgische Elek- tricltäts-Werke A.G. is the second main power station supplying the city of Hamburg. It is situated in the Neuhofer Canal adjacent to the railway sidings south of the Oderhafen. It has an installed capacity of 130 MW.
The station was opened in 1926 and was designed to have an ultimate capacity of 300 MW. The last known extension was in 1931 and brought the capacity of the station to 130 MW. It is thought probable that some further increase in capacity has been made since that date.
A transformer and switching house is attached to the machine house.
The station is connected to the Hamburg citx supply network and the other local generating stations by medium- and low- voltage cables. So far as is known, no high voltage overhead lines are connected.
-307-
P u b lic U t i l i t y S e r v ic e s ( c o n t) E le k tr iz itä ts w e r k U n te re lb e A .G .' S ch u lan (2 ) When in 1927/28 th e c a p a c ity o f th e e x is tin g 26 MW Neumuhlen power s t a t i o n became too. sm a ll to su p p ly th e a re a N o rth and N o rth - West o f A lto n a and A lto n a p ro p e r, a w e stern suburb o f Hamburg, t h i s company b u i l t a power s t a t i o n a t Schulan w hich was p lanned f o r an u ltim a te c a p a c ity o f 160 MW. I t s p r e s e n t i n s t a l l e d c a p a c ity i s 80 MW. The s t a t i o n i s s it u a te d j u s t E a st o f th e town o f S c h u la n , 10 m ile s W est o f A lto n a and 13 m ile s West of Hamburg.
E l e k tr iz i tä ts w e r k e A lto n a ( R u c k e rts t r a a s e ) (3 )
Owned by th e S ta te R ailw ays t h i s p la n t i s on th e railw ay^ l i n e w hich ru n s N orth out of th e A lto n a J u n c tio n , and i t s u p p lie s A lto n a and d i s t r i c t . I t s c a p a c i ty i s e stim a te d a t 30 MW.
Hochbahn Power S ta tio n Barmbeck (3) The p la n t l i e s in th e H e llb ro o k e r­ s t r a s s e , and s u p p lie s Hamburg’ s e le v a te d r a ilw a y . I t s c a p a c ity i s e stim a te d a t 30 MW.
Neumuhlen Power S ta tio n Neumuhlen On th e N o rth ern sh o re o f th e U n ter E lbe iju st E a s t o f th e F is c h e r e i- H a f e n , A lto n a , t h i s s t a t i o n i s used o nly f o r peak lo a d . C a p a c ity i s e stim a ted a t 26 MW.
E le k tr iz itä ts w e r k e Harburg-Wilhelmsburg (-) T h is s t a t i o n i s lo c a te d on th e c e n t r a l b a s in o f th e th re e docks on th e S o u th ern sh o re o f th e S lid e r-E lb e , o p p o s ite H oheshaf. The c a p a c ity i s e stim a ted a t 12 MW.
P r e u s s e n - E le k tra S w itc h in g S ta tio n Harburg-Gutmoor (J) T h is s t a t i o n l i e s on th e E a s te r n ­ m ost ra ilw a y l i n e of th e H arb u rg - Gutmoor M a rsh a llin g y a rd s , a t a p o in t ab o u t 1 m ile S o u th -e a s t o f th e H arburg-P hoenix R ubber f a c to r y .
No f u r t h e r d e t a i l s a r e a v a i l a b l e .
A lto n a e r G as- u . W asserw erke A lto n a (3 ) G. m. b . H.
In 1936 th e m ain gasw orks in A lto n a / B a h re n fe ld made 880 m illio n cu b ic f e e t o f g a s . In a d d it io n , 150 m il li o n c u b ic f e e t o f gas were p u rch ased from
-308-
Public Utility Services (cont) Altonaer Gas- u. Wasserwerke G.m.b.H. (oont) Altona (3)
,
the Hamburger Gaswerke. The company was taken over by the Hamburger Gaswerke in 1938.
Hamburger Gaswerke G.m.b.H.
In 1936 the company* s three gas­ works, which are listed below, made 6,800 million cu.ft. of gas and purchased a further 510 million cu. ft. from the Norddeutsche Kohlen- und Coks-Werke A.G. coking plant. In 1939 long-distance gas supplies were being made to 53 places outside Hamburg proper, including the formerly independent works at Bergedorf.
Gasworks Barmbeck (3) (Osterbeckstr.) The Barmbeck works of the Hamburger Gaswerke lies in the Osterbeckstr., South of the Osterbeck Canal.
Gasworks Grasbrook (3) The Grasbrook plant of this company is situated by the Grasbrook Hafen, where the Baken Hafen joins the Norder Elbe.
Gasworks Tiefstack (3) The Tiefstack plant lies at a point where the Elbe Canal joins the Holz Hafen (East of Rothenburgsort) Hamburger Wasserwerke G.m.b.H Billwarder Ausschlag (-) These water-purification works have 6 pumping engines, pumping 30,000 cbm. of water per day into U storage containers.
The' figures relating to the waterworks at Hamburg are based on official German publications of 1936. The total sales of the Hamburger Wasserwerke G.m.b.H. and Wasserwerke Hamburg-Ost in 1936 were over 71 million cu.m.
-309-
P u b lic U t i l i t y S e r v ic e s ( c o n t) W asserwerke B illb ro o te ^ T ie fsta c k ) (-) Theee a re a r t e s i a n w e lls , 250 m. d eep , y ie ld in g 13 m illio n cbm. p e r annum e q u a l to 21 p e r c e n t, o f Hamburg’ s t o t a l p re -w a r w a te r consum ption. F i l t e r i n g and p u r i ­ f i c a t i o n p l a n t s a ls o in c lu d e d in th e w orks.
Pumping S ta tio n C u rsla c k ( - ) (18 Km* S.E. o f Hamburg,
T h is i s a la rg e combined pumping s t a t i o n and w a t e r - p u r i f i c a t i o n p la n t w ith .a c a p a c ity to su p p ly 90,0 0 0 cbm. p e r day.. In th e c a tc h ­ ment a re a th e r e a re 260 s e p a r a te w e lls o p e ra te d in two d i s t i n c t pumping s ta g e s . The p u r if ie d w a te r i s conducted by two m ains to th e R o th e n b u rg so rt pumping s t a t i o n in to a c o l l e c t i n g b a s in , o f lj.0,000 cbm. c a p a c ity . C u rs la c k s t a t i o n , to g e th e r w ith th e B illb r o o k p l a n t ( s e e a b o v e ), m eets 75 p e r cen t, o f th e tow n’ s re ­ q u ire m e n ts.
Pumping S ta tio n R o th e n b u rg so rt T h is p la n t h as 12 p m p s w ith a maximum c a p a c ity of 23,000 cbm ., pumping s t r a i g h t i n to town m ain s.
Pumping S ta tio n Cuxhaven T h is s t a t i o n h a s a c a p a c ity to su p p ly one m illio n cbm. p e r annum p lu s a f u r t h e r 85,000 cbm. w hich i s s u p p lie d to s h ip p in g .
- J10 -
SolidFuels
Norddeutsche Kohlen*- und Cokeswerke Hamburg-Peute (3)
This coking plant is situated opposite the Norddeutsche Affinerie» In 1938 it had 80 coke ovens and a maximum rated dry coal capacity of 249,000 tons per annum* Nearly all the surplus gas produced here was sold to the Hamburger Gaswerke.
Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication Norddeutsche Affinerie Peute (1)
This is the most important copper smelting and refining unit in Germany.
Its smelting and blast furnaces treat imported ores, matte, and concentrates, as well as imported scrap. The refineries t treat blister copper and imported high­ grade scrap. In 1938, the plant had an estimated capacity for electrolytic refining of 90,000 tons per annum and a capacity for fire refining of 30,000 tons per annum.
Before the war, an appreciable quantity of nickel was recovered from fire-refined and electrolytic copper produced by other German refineries and, by means of the process of recovery employed at Norddeutsche Affinerie, some 350 tons of metallic nickel were produced annually before 1*938 from these sources. $his refinery was also engaged in recovering metal from the increased nickel coinage minted in 1933 "«dien the coinage whs recalled in 1939» Since there is no great reservoir of nickel scrap to be drawn upon in Germany, it is probable that present production of recovered nickel amounts to only 50^ of capacity, which is estimated at 500 tons of metal per annum. Some nickel may also be produced direct from Petsamo ores, in a small smelter which formerly treated Moroccan nickel-cobalt ores.
These works also include a lead refining plant which had an annual capacity of 3$,000 tons .before the war. Other installations are a small cobalt refinery and sulphuric acid plant. The latter is estimated to have had a capacity of 40,000 tons per annum in 1938.
Zinnwerke/
311
Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication (Contd) Zinnwerke Wilhelmsburg G.m.b.H. Wilhelmsburg (2) This plant is believed to be fu lly equipped to deal with a ll types of copper, including scrap a llo y s. I ts pre-war capacity was 20,000 tons of copper produced by the e le c tro ly tic refining process and 40,000 tons produced by the fire -re fin in g process. • Metallwalzwerk Georg Dittman Hamburg (3) This copper refining- plant employs the fire -re fin in g process. I t i s engaged mainly on the treatment of plant scrap. I ts pre-war capacity was 10,000 tons per annum. Included in the works is a small fab ricatin g p lan t.
Norddeutsche Leichtmetall & Kolbenwerice, G.m.b. H.
Altona (3)
This firm of light-m etal allo y fab ricato rs is reported to be engaged on the manufacture of Joints, sections, etc. and reports suggest th at one of these departments manufactures aero-engine pistons.
Hamburger Bleiwerk A.G.
w
Hamburg ( Suderstrasse)
(3)
These are lead ro llin g m ills also producing finished and semi­ fin ish ed a rtic le s .
H.Sieg (vom. Sieg & Henningsen ) AT tana I (Oeversee Strasse,
This small firm is believed, to be * engaged on the manufacture of aluminium castings. '
Kupferhütte E rtel Bieber, A. C.
This small copper foundry tre a ts py rites cinders fo r production of copper sulphate. No d e ta ils are available regarding i t s capacity.
R eiherstieg (-)
- 312 -
Rhenania-Ossag MineraloeIwerke A.G. Harburg (1) This is the largest and most important oil refinery in Germany. Its estimated capacity is 550,000 tons per annum.
In 1939, a polymerisation plant was installed for the production of high-grade aviation lubricating oils. Adjacent to the refinery, and forming part of the Sactory site, are a large number of storage tanks which are believed to have a total storage capacity of 272,000 tons. • Rhenania-Ossag Mineraloelwerke A. Gw Grasbrook (2) This refinery includes a grease plant, solvent de-waxing plant, and installations for the blending of aviation lubricating oils. It serves as a complementary plant to the Rhenania-Ossag Works at Harburg, from which it receives distillates.
The refining capacity of this plant is estimated to be 130,000 tons per annum.* Adjacent to the plant are storage facilities believed to be capable of holding 121,000 tons.
Europäische Tanklager & Transport (3) A.G. ( "Eurotank") Petroleum Hafen Prior to the war, this refinery had a capacity of 400,000 tons per annum.
Reliable intelligence tends to show that the refinery is now inactive, but it is believed that the storage installations, which have an estimated capacity of 100,000 tons, are in use.
Ebano Asphaltwerke A.G. Harburg (-)
This plant is believed to be inactive.
Its prewar capacity was 400,000 tons per annum. It operated primarily for asphalt, but could also carry out primary distillation at a rate of 400,000 tons per annum. The site includes storage facilities which are estimated at 100,000 tons and are also believed to be inactive.
Deutsche petroleum A.G. Wilhelmsburg (3)
The capacity of this refinery is believed to be of the order of 70,000 tons per* annum. The storage facilities have a capacity of approximately 95,000 tons.
Ernst/
- 3 1 3 -
Ljquld Fuels (Contd)
Ernst Schliemann’s Oelwerke Grasbrook (j)
This is a lubricating-oil plant producing white oils as well'as ordinary lubricants. Its capacity is not definitely known, but is believed to be relatively small. The works include storage facilities for AO,000 tons. * Julius Schindler Oelwerke G.m.b.H. Wilhelmsburg (j)
This is primarily a lubricating-oil plant, but is believed to include also a small distillation plant.
The total capacity is estimated to be 40,000 tpns per annum and equivalent storage facilities are situated within the factory site.
Deutsche Vacuum °elA.G. Schulau (near Wedel. 15 km. W.N.W. of Hamburg) (2)
This plant includes facilities for re-running, blending, and grea se compounding. It supplies a large proportion of all high-grade greases used in Germany and is therefore of greater importance than is indicated by its size. The total capacity of this plant is estimated to be 35,000 tons per annum.
Deutsch-Amerikanische Petroleum Ges. Schulau (-)
This is a small re-running plant, but there is no firm evidence that it is active. Its prewar capacity was 10,000 tons per annum and there are storage facilities of 50,000 tons capacity.
Mineraloel & Asphaltwerke A.G. Ostermoor (-) (M.A.W.A.G.)
This plant, which, prior .to the war, operated mainly for Asphalt, is believed to be inactive. Its prewar capacity was 150,000 tons p.a.
Note:. Prior to the war Hamburg was of great importance as an oil-storage centre.
The principal concentration of storage facilities are installed at the Oelhafen.
Hamburg’s total storage facilities amounted to 1,600,000 tons, vhich figure includes the storage capacities mentioned under the individual refineries listed above. Xt is not known to what extent any of the storage facilities in the Hamburg area are being utilized and there is reason to believe that many of the storage plants not directly connected with the refineries are inactive.
Draeger Werke/
- 3 U - *
Draeger Werks Wandsbeck (3)
Draeger Werke of Lübeck purchased a plant in Wandsbeck for the manufacture of submarine cleaning apparatus in 1938 • In 1941 it was reported to employ about 200 workers*
Hansa-Motorenfabrik Gustav Altmann Altona < 3) (Krupp str.)
This firm specialises in the manufacture of electric motors and wireless generators for submarines.
Conz.Elektrizit8.ts G.nub.H* Bahrenfeld* (3) (Gas str.)
Echo sounding gear for submarines and similar devices are made by this firm which is also engaged on the repair and maintenance of this type of equipment.
Noie; There is under "Engineering” an additional number of firms partly engaged on the manufacture of finished or semi-finished * products for the Naval and Mercantile shipbuilding ’industry.
- 315 -
Blohm & Voss Steinmarder (1)
This is the most important shipbuilding yard in Germany, and is engaged on the construction of warships of all types, including submarines, as well as motor vessels and cargo steamers, .Incorporated within the site of this shipyard are large general-engineering works, primarily engaged on the building of Diesel engines, steam engines, and boilers» The yards have 8 slips of 250 to, 926 ft. , 7 floating docks (three of which were sunk in the course of the R.A.F. raids in July 1943), and a 1,000 ft. graving dock. The graving dock is still under con­ struction, and when completed will be the only one of its kind in Hamburg. It is estimated that in 1943 this plant (i.e. ship­ building yards and engineering works com­ bined) employed between 15,000 and 17,000 workers.
Deutsche Werft A.G. Finkenwärder (2)
These shipbuilding yards consist of 6 slips of 600 ft. , which are extendable up to 750 ft. There is also one floating dock.
During the war these yards have specialised in the construction of 740-ton type süb- ' marines. Other types of vessels constructed here on a fairly large scale are tankers, and the yards are also well known for their motor-vessel output.
Deutsche Werft A.G. . Reiher stieg ’(2) .
These yards specialise on the construction of escort vessels, minesweepers, freighters, tankers, and other craft. As from 1941 on they were partly engaged on the construction of tank landing craft, but it is believed that this activity has now ceased. Another v important activity at this yard is the re- ■ pair of vessels of similar types to those constructed here. The yards have two slips of 330 to 500 ft, and 4 floating docks.
In 1941 some 3,000 workers were employed.
Hbwaldtswerke, A.G. Vulcan Yard (2)
Prior to the war this yard specialised in the building of large passenger vessels and motor vessels. In the course of the war the construction of submarines ■> mainly of the 500-ton type, was taken up on ,a considerable scale. The yards consist of three slips of 650 ft. and four floating docks. Also within * the site of these yards are Diesel engine construction and general machine shops. The Diesel engines built here are of the J4.A.N. type. It is believed that in 1943 some 6,000 workers were employed.
Norderwerft/
- 3 1 6 -
ShipbuildinR ( Contd)
Norderwerft, A.G. Reiherstieg (3) Prior t® the -war these yards were engaged on the construction of small motor vessels of various types, fishing vessels, and trawlers.
In the course of the war auxiliary war vessels, particularly aircraft salvage ships, have been built. The yards con­ sist of 4 slips up to 250 ft. and one broadside slip, as well as one floating dock. In addition there are 2 patent slips of 25 and 100 tons respectively, which are employed for the building of trawlers. In 1939 some 700 workers were employed at these yards. Reports suggest that» this number increased to a little over 1,000 in the course of the war.
H.C.Stttlcken & Sohn SteinwSrder ( 3) Since 1940 this yard has concentrated mainly on the building of 500-ton type, submarines, as well as 600-ton mine­ sweepers. Prior to the ivar small freighters were the principal type of craft built here,, but it is believed that this activity ceased early in 194°• The yard consists of three slips of 300 ft. and 4 floating docks. Early on in the war some 1,500 workers were employed. It is believed that this figure has not been considerably increased.
Hamburgische Schiffbau Versuchsanstalt Hellbrook near Barmbeck
This is a small research and design establishment, engaged on work in - connection with merchant vessels on behalf of the Hanburg shipbuilding industry. It is believed that the establishment is small and X)f relatively-minor importance.
Schnelldampfer Co. of Berliner Lloyd Billhafen (N.E. of BillwÄrder Ausschlag) This company operates approximately 30 (*) river vessels, chiefly on the Elbe River, between Hamburg and Dresden. This Hamburg plant is mainly engaged on the repair of ships* engines, boilers, and other equipment. Prior to the war some 300 workers were employed.
Aircraft
-317-
Aircraft and Aero Engines
Blohm & Voss Finkenw&rder (2) $his plant is believed to be engaged On the • manufacture of air-frame components and the assembly of B.V.-type seaplanes. It is re­ ported that these works were formerly in­ installed at the Osthalle shipbuilding yard.
Blohm & Voss Steinwtrder (j) The manufacture of components for B.V. -type seaplanes is believed to be undertaken by this plant on a small scale.
Blohm & Voss Worthdarnm (-) T his plant is reported to be engaged on the manufacture and assembly of major components for Dorniejvtype aircraft, vhich are said to be supplied to the wörks at Wentzendorf ( see below) •
Aircraft Assembly & Components Factozy Wentzendorf (-) It is reported that a new aircraft assembly . plant has been erected at Wentzendorf, and is also engaged on the-manufacture of minor aircraft components. Reports also suggest that components are received from the’B.V. works at Worthdarnm. There is no confirmation of these reports.
Vereinigte Deutsche Metallwerke A.G-. (V.D.M.) Altona/Bahrenfeld (2)
and Gross Borstel (1)
The Bahrenfeld works of this company are situated in two former cigarette factories, which have been extended since they were acquired by the V.D.M.
The Gross-Borstel plant has been erected in the course of the'war. Both plants are engaged on the manufacture of air-screw blades, $ hubs, propeller shafts, and sundry accessories; and assemble completex propellers. They are credited with a high proportion of the total German propeller output.
Humbold t-Deutz-Motoren Reparaturwerk G.'m.b.H. Moorfleth (2)
This plant is believed to be engaged on the repair of radial air-cooled engines, as well as on the manufacture and complete assembly of engines. The works is equipped with 10 aero-engine test beds, and*is believed to have a relatively small serial production of B.M.W. 801-type aero-engines which are supplied to the Tutow and Aschersleben aircraft-assembly works. (This works has also been referred to as the KIBckner Flugmotorenbau G.nubji.)
H.Maihak/'
- J18 -
H.Maihak, A.G. Hamburg ( 2 ) (Geibelstr.)
This small undertaking manufaxrtures fuel­ feed pumps and fuel-consumption indicators for aircraft.
B.M.W. Hamburg (-) ( Larupchausse e) It has been reported that the B.M.W. company have built a new factory near to’the air field at Larupchaussee, which is said to have come into operation in September 1942 and to be engaged exclusively on the repair and maintenance of engines for the Ju.52. The reports are not satisfactorily confirmed.
Leiohtmetallbau G.m.b.H. , Hamburg (3) ( Larupchaussee)
It is believed that this' fipm manufactures fuel and oil containers for aircraft, as well as pilots* seats and a <vao?iety of other small accessories for aircraft.
-319-
Engineering and Armaments Note: . A number of engineering firms specialising on, or exclusively engaged on, equipment and components for the shipbuilding industry are listed in the foregoing section under "Shipbuilding0 .
Theodor Zeise Altona (3) (Spichernstr.) This firm is believed to be the second largest German manufacturer of ships’ screws. They also make a variety of other engineering products. • Hanseatisches Kettenwerk, Hamburg-Ochsenzoll (3) G.m.b.H. (H.A.K.) (opposite the Hochbahn Station) Reporte suggest that this firm employed some 2',000 workers in 192+3 on the manufacture of shell cases and complete shells.
Vidal & Sohn, Tempowerk Bostelbeck (3) Major components for small types of armoured fighting vehicles are believed to be made by this works.
Vidal & Sohn, Tempowerk Hamburg (3) (Am Radeland) A.F.V’s of small type are reported to be assembled at this works since 1941.
Vidal. & Sohn, Tempowerk Hamburg (3) (Langenhorn I.) Tank tracks and other tank parts are reported to be made here.
C. Plath Rahrenfeld (3) (Luruper Heerstrasse) This plant specialises in the manufacture of components for magnetic mines, and navigational instruments such as compasses, drift indicators, etc.
Bauer & Schaurte Wandsbeck (-) These are well known makers of precision instruments mainly of the navigational type. Reports suggest that the plant has been transferred to Jagerndorf in Moravia.
I
- 520 -
Engineering and Armaments (cont) Compemotor A.G. Bahrenfeld (3) (Gas Strasse)
Electric motors, mainly for sub­ marines, but also small Lathe motors and other types are made by this firm.
Heidrenreich & Harbeck Barmbeck (2) (Wiesendamm) This firm is believed to make machine tools, particularly lathes, gear-cutting machines, automatic and wood working machines on a . large scale. .
Gebr. Leser, vorm. G. Wittmann Hamburg (3) (Wendenstrasse)
Armatures, special fittings and high-pressure gear for submarines and special ships* fittings are . made by this firm.
Moeller, Oehmichen & Co. Stellingen (3) Ver. Barometer Fabriken (Jaguarstieg), This firm specialises in the manu­ facture of measuring instruments particularly, altitude-recording instruments.
"Messap", Deutsche Messapparate, Hamburg (3) G.m.b.H. (Garstedterweg) This firm is reported to be engaged on the manufacture of measuring instruments, particularly’ aircraft gauges.
Kurbelwellen Werk, G.m.b.H. Reinbeck (3) Reports suggest that this small firm makes crankshafts for aero-and other engines.
Hans Still Billbrook. (3) v .(Liebigstrasse) Ground intelligence indicates that this firm is an important supplier of electromotor-aggregates to Naval shipyards.
C. H. F. Muller A.G. ' FuhlbUttel (3) (Philips-Valvo, G.m.b.H.) (Rontgenst'raase) This undertaking is registered under both aforementioried names at the given address. It is believed to be engaged on the manufacture of X-ray tubes and equipment, fluorescent tubes, and similar apparatus.
-3 2 1 -
Engineering and Armaments (cont) Radioröhren Fabrik Valvo G.m.b.H. Lockstedt (3) (Horst Wessel Allee) , It is reported that this is a large supplier of radio valves.
Menck & Hambrock G.m.b.H. Altona (3) (Gr. Brunnen Strasse) This company are important manu­ facturers of excavator shovels, bulldozers, and pile-driving machines, 1,400 workers are said to have been employed in 1941* Hamburger Motorenfabrik Hamburg (3) Carl Jest ram (Grosse Reichenstr.) Diesel engines and suction-gas 1 motors are made by this firm on a W small scale.
Hanseatische Motoren- Bergedorf (3) gesellschaft m.b.H. (Kampdeich) Marine and stationary motors are reported to have been made by this firm in 192+2 with a staff of 600.
Hugo Danger Barmbeck (-) (Maurienstrasse)
It is reported that this firm, formerly employing 190 workers on machine tools, in 1943 employed some 500 workers on a variety of armament components.
Dennert & Pape Altona (-) . 1 (Harpunierstr.) i
Measuring instruments and torpedo­ angling discs are said to be the sole products of this small firm.
Maschinenfabrik R. Lotze Hamburg (-) (Ausschlägerweg)
This firm formerly made lifting gear and similar appliances. It is now reported to be making under­ water mines.
-322
Chemicals .and E xplosives Chemische F abrik E id e lste d t (2) Dr. Hugo S toltzen b erg This firm i s believed to be one of the o rig in a l producers of gases fo r chem ical w arfare. I t functioned as such during the 1914- 18 war when phosgene, mustard and a rse n ic a l gases were made. Ground re p o rts suggest th a t in,19U2 and 192+3 the firm was again engaged on the production of m a te ria ls fo r chem ical w arfare.
Norddeutsche Chemische Harburg . (3) F a b rik e n Harburg, A.G.
S ulphuric a c id , n i t r i c a c id , sodium sulphate and other chem icals are made by th is firm .
Guano Werke A.G. Harburg (3) S ulp h u ric a c id , f e r t i l i z e r s , e tc . are made by th is firm on a sm all sca le .
9
Chemische F ab rik in B illw arder B illbrook (3) (vorm. H ell & Sthamer) Inorganic and organic a c id s , in ­ s e c tic id e s , f e r t i l i z e r s , raw m a te ria ls f o r p l a s t i c s , t a r o i l s and t a r -
*
d i s t i l l a t e p ro d u c ts, as w ell as tanning m a te ria ls are produced by th is firm which, p r io r to the war, employed 500 workers.
Chemische F&brik vorn. Wilhelmsburg (-) J . E. D eb rien t, A.Ö.
Producers of in s e c tic id e s , pigments e tc .
B igot, Schärfe 4 Co. K irch en allee (- ) Chemische F ab rik , G.m.b.H.
Borax, b o ric a c id , b o ra te s , b o ro c a lc ite , e$c. are made here on a sm all sc a le . •Rubber and Tyres Harburger Gummiwarenfabrik Harburg (1) Phoenix This is one of the p rin c ip a l German ty re m anufacturers. The estim ated pre-w ar c ap acity of th is works is 50,000 ty re s per month. Estim ated c u rre n t output is 12,000 tru ck and motor ty re s and 1,500 aero ty re s per month.
e
- 3 2 3 -
Rubber and Tyres (cont)
Tretorn Gummi u. Asbestwerke, A.G. Barmbeck (3) Rubberised fabric and Fubber shoe /materials as well as asbestos products are made by this firm on a fairly large scale.
Deutsches Gummi-Regenerier Werk Hamburg (3) Wilhelm Golonndeck '<& Co.
This is a modern plant erected in 1937• The firm specialises in the production of reclaim for sale to rubber manufacturers and is believed to have a capacity of 7,500 tons per annum.
Gustav Bartsch Hamburg (3), From a plant employing 20 workers in 1935, this plant had grown to one employing 1,000 in 1938- Bartsch is believed to be making solid tyres,
'
rubber soles and heels, etc., mainly from reclaim. *
. . .. - ’ *
Rubber old Werke A.G. Hamburg- Billbrook (3) (and Wasungen Thpringia) The chief products of this factory are felt and asphalt roofing materials, insulating materials, and proofed tarpaulins for goods trucks. They also * make belting, brake linings, and other mechanicals. Their consumption of rubber is insignificant,. but they are important producers of this type of proofed material'. Early in the war (19ÜÖ) they employed about 1,000 workers.
Ernst Kah Vulkan-Ans tad t Hamburg/Altona (-) Government-licensed re-treading con­ cern with capacity to process U50 motor tyres monthly.
Ernst Kahnes Vulkan-Betrieb Hamburg/Wandsbek (-) Government licensed re-treading con­ cern with capacity to process 500 motor tyres monthly.
Metallgummi G.m.b.H. Hambürg/Harburg (-) A producer of rubber-metal bonded parts. This concern is controlled by Harburger G.W.F. Phoenix and the Metallgummi plant is housed in the Phoenix works at Hamburg/Harburg.
-322*-
Rubber and Tyres
New-York Hamburger. Gummi a) Hamburg/Harburg (2) Waaren Compagnie and b) Hamburg/Barnbeck (3)
The first works is more modern and normally employed about 1,000 workers. It produces footwear, hard rubber medical appliances, electrical insulation materials, and mechanicals.
The second works is the older plant, and employed about 400 workers in the manufacture of footwear only.
Norddeutsche Asbest- und Hamburg-Wandleben.
Gummiwerke Kurt Weber & Co.
G.m.b.H.
Manufacturers of mechanicals, rubber­ asbestos products, electrical insulation. In 1939 they employed 200 to 300 workers.
F. Pan ton Dampf-Vulkan st alt Harburg/Wilhelmsburg Government-licensed retreading • concern with capacity to process
•
675 motor tyres monthly.
Reichart & Co. Hamburg 39 3 “) This small, but well-equipped factory. Produced about. 600 tons Of reclaim yearly before the war.
Food Stuffs
F. ThBrl’s Vereinigte Harburger Oelfabriken, A.G.
This is the largest edible-oil pro-, ducing firm in Germany. There are 4 separate plants* in production and 3 additional properties; one pf the latter appears to serve for storage, -another used to house the fat - hardening department^ while the ' purpose of the third is not known.
The total seed-crushing and/or extractingxcapacity of their works in 1939 was 193,000 tons. The built- over land owned by the company covers an area of 119,000 sq. m.
Harburg (3)
*
(Seehafen) This is the largest of the Th’orl plants.
Its pre-war activities were the pro­ duction and refining of high-grade edible oils and fats.
-325-
Food Stuffs (cont)
F. Thorl’s Vereinigte Harburger Oelfabriken, A.G. (cont)
Harburg (3) (Schlossetrasse and Gr. Schippsee).
Pressing plant, linseed oil refinery, oilcake factory, and varnish works.
Harburg (3) (Dampf schiff sweg)
Extraction plant and fat-hardenkng plant.
Harburg (3) (Zitadelle)
Extraction of fatty acids, dis­ tillation, filtering, and lecithin plant.
Harburg (3) (Lauenbrücker Deich) "Fabrik Elbe” serves as storage warehouse.
Harburger Oelwerke Brinckmann & Mergell
This firm has two plants in the Harburg area and is the second largest pro­ ducer of edible oils and fats in Germany. The total annual capacity of the two plants was 165,000 tons in 1936.
a) Manufacture and refining Harburg (3) of edible oils and fats. b) Hydrogenation of vegetable Harburg (3) oils.
Hansa-M&hle A.G. Neuhof-Wilhelmsburg (3) The Hansa-Mtthle are producers of edible oils and fats. The plant covers an area of 260,000 sq.m.
In 1936 the f irm* s capacity was 11+5,000 tons.
-326-
Food gtuffs (cont)
Schlinck & Cie, A.G. Harburg-Wilhelmsburg (formerly H. Schlinck (Nord) (3) & Cie) J
Schlinck & Cie transferred their Mannheim plant to Wilhelmsburg and enlarged the works considerably in 193Ö-1932, (especially the margarine plant), adding a modern boiler-house and power plant. The works occupy an area of 165,754 sq.m, with a canal frontage of 550 m. They comprise: copra and oilcake storage, vegetable-oil refinery, vegetable- and cooking-fat refinery, margarine factory, soap factory, and numerous accessory plants. In 1938 the firm’s seed-crushing capacity was 46,000 tons p.a.
Toepffers Oelwerke G.’m.b.H. Veddel (3) This concern is a subsidiary of the Stettiner Oelwerke A.G. of ZÜllchow near Stettin. The plant covers 7,190 sq.m, of built-up ground and is reported to have produced about 80,000 tons of edible oils and fate A in 1938.
Noblee & ThSrl G.m.b.H. Harburg (3) This large plant was equipped in 1938 for crushing, extracting, and hardening edible oils.and fats at a rate of 128,000 tons per annum.
Norddeutsche Oelmuhlenwerke A.G. Altona (3) This seed-crushing and extracting plant was built with a capacity of 32,000 t.p.a.
Hamburger Freihafen Lagerhaus Gesellschaft Hamburg (2) This is the largest group of Hamburg’s warehouses for colonial produce and general goods. The undertaking was formed in 1885 following the incorporation of Hamburg in the German Customs area.
The Company’s premises consist of the Renting Dept., Storage Dept., and the Quay Dept. The built-over terrain covered 54,919 sq.m, (all 5-6 storey buildings) on the Northern shore of the Elbe, and 55,650 sq.m, on the Southern shore. (1-2 storey buildings).
Food Stuffs (cont) Hamburger Freihafen Lagerhaus Gesellschaft (cont.) Hamburg (2)
•
The quay installations covered a land area of approximately 2 million sq.m. (84 quay sheds In • all 20-g- km. in length and 11 sheds for river craft - covering $6,000 sq.m.). The whole harbour serving the H.F.L.G. had in all 96 quay sheds 21-j km. in length, with ' 730,000 sq.m, storage space. In 1939 there were 1,200 cranes. In the course of the war many of these installations have been seriously damaged by air attack.
Hamburger Getreide Lagerhaus A.G. Harburg- Wilhelmsburg and Hamburg (Kuhwarder, Reiherdamm) (3)
The facilities of this company consisted of warehouses especially for grain. The Company’s own property in Wilhelmsburg covered 17,718 sq.m, and included a quay, storage sheds with about 8,000 sq.m, space, and a storage capacity of 10,000 tons.
Property on lease in Hamburg coverea 4,000 sq.m, built-up, with a stpräge.capacity of 35,000 tons. These installations were fitted with silos, and drying and cleaning installations. Most of these facilities have been damaged inthe course of air raids.
There are in Hamburg numerous grain silos and flour mills of which the following are believed to be the largest and most active:- . Hamburger Muhlenbetrieb- Harburg (-) This is believed to be one of the largest German flour mills. It had a pre-war capacity of 150 tons per day.
A. Plange Hamburg (-) This is the largest of the principal Hamburg mills. Its capacity in 1938 was 300 tons per day.
H. Lange Hamburg (-) H. Lange is the second largest flour mill in Hamburg. Its pre-war capacity was 200 tons per day.
■328-
B ro tfa b rik E lbe A.G-. Hamburg ( - ) T h is i s by f a r th e l a r g e s t b a k e ry in th e Hamburg a re a . In 1938 i t s c a p a c ity was re p u te d to be 100,000 lo a v e s o f b rea d p e r d a y . I t th e n had a f l o u r - s t o r a g e p l a n t w ith a c a p a c ity o f 4 ,0 0 0 to n s .
HAHELN (Hanover) t 55° 5' N. 9° 20* E: 240 miles: (29,000)
Hameln is on the right bank of the river Weser 20 miles S.W. of Hanover. The Weser is navigable at this point and Hameln has a small inland harbour. It is on the railway line from Hanover to Paderborn and three minor branch lines diverge at Hameln, one leading up the valley of the Weser, the second downstream to Lbhne and the third through the Teutoburgerwald to Bielefeld. Hameln has a variety of industries, all on a small scale, such as bricks and tiles, flour milling and soap.
Transportation
Railway Repair Shops Hameln (3)
These are medium-sized repair shops undertaking mainly the repair of goods wagons.
- 329 -
HAMELN (Hanover) Contd.
TYPE AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVES
Engineering and Armaments Concordia G. m.b.H.
LOCATION PRIORITY
RATING
Mariental- (-) erstr.
The Eisen & Hartgusswerk Concordia G.m.b.H. are iron founders and specialise in chilled-iron rolls and casting moulds for metal rolling and also for the paper and rubber industries.
Kaminski G.m.b.H. Werftstr. (-) The Frank Kaminski G.nub.H. manufacture iron and steel couplings.
Textiles tRayon Pulp and Paper Seidenweberei Hameln (-)
The Mechanische Seidenweberei are reported to have enlarged their silk saving plant and to be making parachutes.
HAMM (Westphalia) 51° 40* N. 7° 50» Et 340 miles: (56,000) Hamm is one of the most vital centres for the railway traffic to the Ruhr. It forms a railway entrance from central and eastern Germany to the whole vast network of the Ruhr railway system. The chief activities of the town itself are concerned with the railway, but there are a number of wire and engineering works and a varnish factory, none of which is individually of importance. Hamm is also the centre of a group of important coal mines which feed the long-distance gas-supply system and a number of power plants, one of which is of great importance.
These have been included in the list below.
Transportation
Marshalling lards Hamm (1) These are the largest and best-equipped marshalling yards in Germany. In 1939 their capacity was 10,000 wagons in 24 hours. The greater part of the rail traffic to and from the heart of the Ruhr and Lower Rhine, Wuppertal, Lenne tai, and Kbln districts passes through these yards and is here sorted for the numerous lines sBrving these most highly industrialised districts of Germany or for despatch to all other parts of the country, except the southern Provinces, and the extreme N.W. corner. It is a vital nerve centre of the German railway system.
Railway Junction Hamm (2) Hamm is not only the marshalling centre for the goods traffic but is also an important junction for all passenger trains proceeding between Western Germany and Northern and Eastern Germany. Two main lines from the East
H A W (Westphalia) Contd.
TYPE AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVES LOCATION PRIORITY
RATING
Transportation (Contd)
Railway Junction contd.
meet in Hamm, one coming through Bielefeld from the direction of Hanover and Berlin and the other through Lippstadt from the direction of Central Germany and Saxony. A third important line reaches Hamm from Münster, to the N.E. West of Hamm these lines diverge into various arteries serving the Ruhr and the Rhineland.
Railway Repair Shops Hamm (j) These repair shops, though extensive, are not of the first importance.
They carry out mainly the repair of goods wagons.
Public Utility Services
Gerste inwerk Stockum (1) THE GERSTE INWERK thermal Power Station of the VEREINIGTE ELEKTRIZITÄTSWERKE WESTFALEN A.G. (V.E.W.) is located in the centre of the Company’s supply system, and is the largest of their plants, with an installed capacity of 120 W . It is situated on the R.Lippe at Stockum, 4 miles west of Hamm, at the N.E. end of the Ruhr industrial area, and is one of the fcur main power stations supplying that area.
The station is operated as a base-load station, and is planned for an ultimate capacity of 200 MW. The plant contains two boiler-houses, a machine house containing 6 and possibly 7 turbo-generator sets, (one having probably been recently added), an indoor substation, and a large open-air transformer and switching station.
4 double-circuit 110 RV. lines connect to Münster,Recklinghausen,Gütersloh, and Unna.
Two 50 IdT. lines connect to Seim and Radbod and there is believed to be a line to Lünen.
There are no important local supplies, and the planned connection to the 220 kV. line from Herdecke to Lehrte has not yet been made.
Coal is supplied from the pits mentioned be].ow.
Gas Supply/Municipal Gasworks Hamm (j)
The long-distance gas-supply network of the Ruhrgas A.G. receives gas from all three of the coking plants mentioned under “Solid Fuels”, and in addition there are the municipal gasworks which, in 1936 purchased and sold 168 million cubic feet of gas.
Solid.
-3J1-
HAMM (Westphalia) Contd.
TYPE Al© DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVES LOCATION PRIORITY ’ — RATING-
$ol^d gm JjL De Wendel & Cie (Heinrich Robert plant) Ham (j) The coal p its and coking plant belonging to th is firm are roughly to the S.W. of Ham near the village of Herringen» There are four pitheads. The output of coal in 1937 was 800,000 tons per annum. The coking plant attached to th is mine has 200 ovens and an annual dry coal capacity of 2*48,000 tons. Gas is supplied to the Westphalian gas network.
A power station with a capacity of 23 MW. i s adjacent to the coking plant and supplies power fo r the De Wehdel p its .
Hoesch A.G. C o llieries and Coking Plant Radbod (3) The Radbod coal mines of the Hoesch A.G. Dortmund are situated 2 miles to the W.N.W. of Hamm. There are five pitheads. The output in 1937 was 1,000,000 tons of coal. There is a coking plant attached to th is mine with 132 ovens and an annual dry coal capacity of 2*2*0,000 tons. Gas is supplied to the Westphalian gas network.
A power station with a capacity of 13 MW supplies power fo r these coal p its .
Sachsen C ollieries & Coking Plant Heessen (3) The Gewerkschaft Sachsen belongs to the Mansf» Id A.G. für Bergbau und Hütten- b etrieb in Eisleben and is situated in Heessen- a small town two miles N.E. of Hamm. There are two pitheads. The output before the war was 900,000 tons of coal per annum. There is -a coking plant attached to th is mine with 95 ovens and an annua.' dry coal capacity of 530,000 tons.
Gas is supplied to the Westphalian gas network. A Power statio n with a capacity of 11 MW supplies power to these p its . —--- oOo— —— HANAU (Hesse Nassau) 50° 10’ N. 8° 55' E: 410 miles: (41,000) Hanau is on the rig h t bank of the Main 10 miles East of Prankfort. The main lin es to Frankfort from B erlin and from Munich join at Hanau before entering the Frankfort area.
Hanau specialises in the working of precious metals and in diamond polishing. There is also a large tyre works. The industries, though few in number, are of high relativ e value to the German war effo rt. In addition to thbse mentioned below» there are a number of smaller engineering works of no great importance.
Public U tility Service9 Municipal Gasworks Hanau (5) In 1936 the works made 162 m illion cubic feet of gas.
r
HAMP (Hess«; Nassau) (Contd)
TYPE AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVES LOCATION
Nonferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication W.C. Heraeus G.m.b.H. Grftnerweg^
The Heraeus works are leading specialists* in the production and fabrication of platinum and other precious metals. Components for industrial apparatus, crucibles, electrodes, sheet platinum, platinum wire, and nets for catalyst nitric- acid plants are among their products.
They are makers of high-temperature ovens for laboratories and industrial use, electric contacts and rhodium- coated mirrors for searchlights. The experimental side of this firm’s activities in connection with precious metal alloys gives it a unique position.
Both as a laboratory fox' secret research and as a production centre it is of the highest importance. It is now owned by Siemens & Halske.
Heraeus Quarzglas G.m.b.H., Grhnerweg These are the leading German quartz glass blowers and makers of lamps and other quartz glass products. They also produce a substance known as rotosil which claimed to be an efficient substitute for quartz glass. The works are situated close to and West of the railway on the Eastern side of the town.
This factory site also includes the works of Heraeus Vacuumschmelze the present activities of which are not known.
G.Siebert G.nub.H. Hanau This firm, on a smaller scale, manufactures platinum products on the same lines as Heraeus. The works are near to the Heraeus factory. The munbipal gas works lie between the two plants.
Engineering and Armaments
G.D. Bracker Hanau The Gr.D.Bracker Sbhne Maschinenbau A.G.
are makers of lifts, hydraulic machinexy, and machinery for the paper-making industry.
They employed some 200 workers in 1959* Pelissier Nachf. Hindenburg Anlage
The Maschinenfabrik A.Pelissier Nachf.G.m.b.H. are makers of hydraulic presses, pumps and accumulators.
Wilhelm Schwahn Wilhelmstr.
This firm manufactures cog-wheels and driving gears,
PRIORITY
RATING
(1)
(2)
(3)
(-)
( - )
- 333 -
HANAU „(Hesse Nassau) (Contd) TYPE AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVES. LOCATION PRICRITY
------------------- - RATING
E n g in e e r^ and Augment s
(Contd)
Drahtwerk Hanau G.m.b.H. Hanau j ) Darmstadt & Günther Hanau ) The above are two of several plants manufacturing wire and wire-netting.
Munitionswerk
A large ammunition filling factory is situated at Wolfgang, a small village one mile S.E. of Hanau.
Dunlop
Hanau (1)
The Deutsche Dunlop Gummi Compagnie A.G. have a large factory in the South­ eastern corner of the town. In 1939 these works employed, 3,500 workers and their daily output was 15,000 cycle, 500 motor-cycle, 1,000 lorry and 2,500 motorcar tyres, with the equivalent number of tubes. Their reclaim plant produced up to 35 tons per week.
Expansion of the works was already planned in 1938 and reports show that this factory has been greatly enlarged during the war. The estimated current output of this works is 10,000 truck and motor tyres and 9,000 aero tyres per month.
Gummischuhfabrik Hanau (2) The Hanauer Gummischuhfabrik,Westheimer & Co. are makers of rubber boots and equipment of natural and synthetic rubber.
They were employing some 1,200 workers at the outbreak of war but are reported to have been much enlarged and to be fully active.
-oOo— — -
- 334 -
HANOVER (Hanover) •
° o 52 25’ N. 9 55’ E: 425 miles: (450,000) Hanover is on the trunk railway line from Berlin to the Rhineland, Ruhr, Holland, Belgium and Northern France. It is a Junction for an important branch leading from Central Germany, and has direct rail connections with Hamburg and Bremen. The Mittelland Kanal, one of the principal arteries of the North German waterways system, passes through the Northern outskirts of the tow.
Hanover, which was formerly the capital of the Kingdom of Hanover, is a highly industrialised city and one of the chief commercial and administrative centres of Northern Germany. The main industries are engineering, rubber tyres, and armaments. The Continental rubber works are estimated to supply 80 per cent of Germany’s aero tyre requirements, and the Hanomag factories are of outstanding importance in the manufacture of A.F.V.’s, £un carriages, tractors, and military transport. There are a number of other large- scale industrial works, the products of which include wire and cables, A.A. and field guns, non-ferrous metal fabrication, accumulators, chemicals, and textiles. The industries are mainly grouped to the North West and V/est of the town. The area that extends from Brink (North of Hanover) Westwards along the Mittelland Kanal to Nordhafen and Stbcken has been selected for the development of several of Germany’s new armaments plants. The Hackethal cable works, a large new accumulator factory, and new works of Continental and Hanomag, are included in this area. To the West of Hanover, in the suburbs of Leinhausen and Linden, are the parent works of Continental and Hanomag, and a number of other engineering works which are described below.
In Misburg, and outlying suburb three miles to the East of the city centre, is an important oil refinery, which has been built on the Western edge of an extensive oil field. Misburg has also been selected as the site for a recently-constructed ordnance factory. A small coalfield lies in the region of Barsinghausen, 8 miles to the South West of the town.
TYPE AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVES LOCATION PRIORITY
Transportation
Marshalling Yards Seelze (2)
The largest and most important marshal 11 ng yards lie some 5 miles West of the town near the outlying suburb of Seelze. They had a capacity of 5,000 wagons per 24 hours in 1938.
Marshalling Yards Hainholz (3)
The marshalling yards in the North Western suburb of Hainholz can handle up to 2,100 wagons per 24 hours.
Goods Station
The main goods station is in the Northern part of Hanover. The area contains many large warehouses and storage depots.
Marshalling Yards
These important marshalling yards had a capacity of 4»000 wagons per 24 hours in 1938* Marshalling Yards
In 1938 these yards had a capacity to handle 2,000 wagons per 24 hours.
Hanover (3)
Lehrte (2)
Linden (3)
Railway/
- 335 -
HANOVER (Contd)
TYPE AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVES LOCATION PRIORITY
-----------------T--------- RATING
Transportation (Contd)
Railway Repair Shops Leinhausen (3)
These large railway workshops are situated in the North Western suburb of Leinhausen. They undertake the repairs of all types of rolling stock and specialise in the repair and maintenance of passenger coaches.
Public Utility Services
Power Station Ahlem (2)
The thermal power station at Ahlem, 3 miles West of Hanover, is owned by the Preussische Elektrizi- t&ts A.G. ( Preussene lektra). It has an installed capacity of 54 MW. and is operated for peak load purposes.
The plant is situated on a branch of the Mittelland Canal. It includes a large boiler house, the machine house containing 4 turbo-generator sets, the switch house, and a substation.
A long-distance 100 kV line leads to the Company’s important substation at Lehrte, thus linking up with the 220 kV grid.
Local supplies are given at 6 kV, 45 60 kV.
Power Station Herrenhausen (2)
The thermal power station owned by the Hanover Corporation is situated in the new suburb of Herrenhausen and has an installed capacity of 50 MW.
A small hydro-electric power station, situated 4 miles to the S.E. on a stretch of water connecting the Seine and Ihme rivers, has an installed. capacity of 3 W , bringing the total capacity to 53 W .
The main plant contains two boiler houses, 5 turbo-generator sets, and a substation.
Electricity is distributed locally at 30 IdT and 5 IdT via the substation. This station and the Ahlem generating station are directly connected and it is linked to the high-voltage grid via the Ahlem substation.
Städtisches Gaswerk Hanover (3)
In 1936 the municipal gasworks purchased 1,500 million cubic feet of gas from the Ruhrgas A.G. for local re-sale.
HANOVER (Contd) - 336 -
T£PE AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVES LOCATION PRIORITY
RATING
s o ^
Steinkohlenbergwerk Barsinghausen (-)
The coal-mine of the Steinkohlen­ bergwerk Barsinghausen G.m.b.H., a subsidiary of the Preussische Berg­ werks - und Hhtten-A.G., is near the small town of Barsinghausen some 8 miles South West of Hanover. In 1937 this colliery had an output of « 250,000 tons. There is a mediun>- tenrperature coking plant with AO ovens of an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 185,000^tons, producing chiefly household fuel. Some 1,200 workers were employed in 1937.
Liquid Fuels
Deurag
Misburg (1)
The Gewerkschaft Deutsche Erd&l Raffinerie A.G. is a subsidiary company of Wintershall A.G.Berlin, and its works are situated in the village of Misburg, which lies some 3 miles East of Hanover. This is an important refining concern which was formed to exploit the Hanover oilfield. The oilfield extends some 20 miles Eastwards from Misburg in the direction of Dollbergen. The refinery is estimated to have an annual capacity of 300,000 tons of oil, including high and low-grade lubricating oils.
There is another oil refinery at Dollbergen which is dealt with under the heading Peine.
Jroi) and
Edelstahlwerke Linden (j)
The parent works of the Deutsche Edelstahlwerke A.G. are in Krefeld.
The Hanover branch is. situated in the South Western suburb of Linden and specialises in the production of high-grade alloy steels for the aircraft industry.
Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication Leichtmetallwerke Linden (2) Leichtmetallwerke Laatzen (2) The headquarters of the important Vereinigte Leichtmetallwerke, which were formerly in Bonn, have now been transferred to Hanover. There are two factories of this concern in Hanover. The first is in Linden, the second in the Southern suburb of Laatzen. Each plant is reported to employ 2,000 workers on the manufacture of bomb components, including/
HANOVER (Contd)
- 337 -
T H E AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVES LOCATION PRIORITY
------------------------ — RATING
Non-Ferroud Metal Manufacture and Fabrication (Contd) Leichtmetallwerke Contd)
including fuses and incendiary-bomb casings, and light-alloy sections and tubes for the aircraft industry.
The Linden factory has an estimated monthly output of 900 tons of aluminium products. The works at Laatzen are believed to produce 65O tons of rolled aluminium per month.
Aircraft and Aero-Engines Eisenwerke Brink (2) The Brinker Eisenwerke Max H.Mtlller is situated in the Northern suburb of Brink. It is an important aircraft repair depot and is reported to employ some 2,000 workers on the repair and • maintenance of fighter aircraft.
Engineering and Armaments Hanomag Linden (1) Hanomag Brink (2) The Hannoversche Maschinenbau A.G-. vorm.Georg Egerstoff (Hanomag) is an old-established engineering firm which formerly manufactured main-line and narrow-gauge locomotives and steam engines, but which since 1930 has concentrated on their own type of motorcar and tractors and agricultural machinery. In recent years they have become highly-important builders, of tanks, and heavy military vehicles.
In addition to the various heavy transport vehicles, Hanomag are also important producers of a variety of other heavy armaments products. They are reported to employ a total of at least 20,000 workers.
The parent works occupy a large area on either side of the Hamelnerstr. in the South Western suburb of Linden. The Linden works have been developed into one of the major units of the German armaments industry, and they supply a large proportion of the requirements of tanks, armoured cars, gun carriages, artillery tractors and military transport of all kinds.
Ln July 1942 this plant is said to have produced a total of 321 tanks, including 196 light and 125 medium tanks.
A second large factory has been recently completed in Brink to the North West of the city, and although reports indicate that the new works is entirely operated by the Hanomag concern the probability remains that at least pairts of it are a Reichswehr ordnance depot. The/
- 338 -
HANOVER ( C ontd)
TYPE AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVE LOCATION PRIORITY
RATING
Engineering and Armaments (Contd)
Hanomag Contd*
The factory at Brink, which it is believed was originally intended as a locomotive works, the manufacture of which had ceased at the Linden works in favour of heavy military transport has now probably the same range of products as the Linden works* The shares of the Hanomag concern are mainly controlled by the Ver.Stahl­ werke A.G. of Düsseldorf* Hackethal A.G. Brink (3)
The Hackethal Draht & Kabelwerke A.G. is situated in the North Western suburb of Brink on the Northern side of the Mittelland Kanal. The company, which has a branch factory in Nürnberg, manufactures all types of wire and cable products, and before the war employed a total of some 1,250 workers. It is estimated that the factory has a wire and cable output of approximately 15,000 tons per annum.
Akkumulatoren Fabrik ' Stücken (1)
The Hanover Stücken Akkumulatoren Fabrik is situated in the outlying suburb of Stücken some 4 miles North West of the town. The plant, which is of considerable importance, has been constructed since the war, and lies on the Southern bank of the Mittelland Kanal about one mile West of Nordhafen. The factory manufactures accumulators for submarines, of which it is reported to supply AO per cent of the total German requirements.
Reports suggest that in April 1943 120 large and 75 small batteries were being produced daily. More than 1,000 workers are reported to be employed.
Dreyer,Rosenkfanz & Droop A.G. Leisewitz (3)
Before the war this firm employed some 450 workers on the manu­ facture of all types of valves and pressure gauges.
Günther Wagner Podbiel- (3) skistr.
The firm of Günther Wagner were formerly well-known makers of fountain pens, duplicating machinery, and all types of office equipment. They are now reported to be employing some 800 workers on the manufacture of . plastic product». Westinghau^Z
- 339 -
HANOVER (Contd) TYPE AND IKSCRlPTiaN OF OBJECTIVE Enor^naering_and A r g e n t s (Cohtd) W estinghaus-Bremsen G e se llsc h a ft m.b.H.
T h is firm s p e c ia lis e s in th e m anufacture o f ra ilw a y braises and a sso c ia te d products*
K brting A.G.
LOCATION PRIORITY
~ RATIN3-
L einhausen (3)
Linden (3)
The K brting Maschinen & A pparatebau A.G* i s b eliev ed to employ some 600 workers on the m anufacture of ra d io s e ts m ainly o f the dom estic type and intended fo r export purposes.
L indener A.G. Empelde (3) The Lindener Zündhütchen & P atronen F ab rik A.G. have a la rg e fa c to ry in the South W estern suburb of Empelde, which produces c a rtrid g e s and d e to n a to rs. A re c e n t re p o rt su g g ests th a t an a d d itio n a l p la n t belonging to t h i s firm has been b u i l t underground n e a r to the Empelde fa c to ry .
Eisenw erk W ülfel W ülfel (2) The Eisenw erk W ülfel i s in th e Southern q u a rte r o f Hanover. I t i s an im portant concern rep o rted to employ some 2,500 w orkers on th e m anufacture o f re d u c tio n gears and o th e r tra n sm issio n and g ear components f o r tan k s and A.F.V. * s.
Ordnance F actory Misburg (-) A re c e n t re p o rt in d ic a te s t h a t a la rg e Ordnance F acto ry has been erected in M isburg on the M itte lla n d K anal. The , products are said to in clu d e A.A. guns and guns f o r ta n k s. The l a t t e r a re d e liv ered to th e Hanomag fa c to ry f o r assem bly. C onsiderable numbers o f fo re ig n workers are r e c e n tly re p o rte d to have a rriv e d in th e Hanover a re a arf th e m a jo rity are said to have been d ra fte d to t h i s p la n t.
B e rs to ff G.nub.H. B u o h h o lzerstr. ( - ) The Hermann B e rsto ff M aschinenbau- A n s ta lt G.nub.H. are makers o f m achinery fo r the ru b b er, c a b le , and p la s t i c s in d u s tr ie s . They employed 300 workers in 1939.
G eldschrankfabrikan A.G. E n g e lb o ste le r ( - ) Pamm
The Bode-Panzer G eldschrankfabriken A.G. employ some 600 workers on th e p ro d u ctio n o f a l l ty p es o f s a fe s and stro n g rooms.
Prom etheus/
- 340 -
HANOVER (Contd) TYRE AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVE LOCATION PRIORITY
RATING
Engineering aqd Anqaiqents (Contd) Prometheus-Werke G.m.b.H. Herrenhausen (-) This firm , ■which is situated in the North Western suburb of 4 Herrenhausen, in 1938 employed some 250 workers on the manufacture of b o ilers, containers, and other storage-tank in sta lla tio n s .
H.Wahlenberg K.G. Brinkerhafen ( j) In 1938 th is firm employed some 600 workers on the manufacture of machine tools.
Ejcplosi.vss Egers to ff A.G. Linden (-) Egerstoff A.G. Badenstedt (-) The A.G. Georg E gerstoff Salzwerke & Chemische Fabriken is a subsidiaiy company of ’the Kali-Chemie concern.
The firm has two branches in the Hanover area, one in the South Western suburb of Linden, the other further West in Badenstedt. They manufacture sulphuric acid, caustic soda, and a v ariety of ta r products.
Meyer & Riemann A.G. Linden (-) This is a subsidiary company of the Westf&lisch-Anhaltische Sprengstoff A.G.Chemische Fabriken of B erlin. I t is believed to employ about 150 workers on the manufacture of sulphuric acid, of which i t has an estimated annual capacity of 5>000 tons, and other miscellaneous chemicals.
TextilegtRayontPulp and Paper Wollk&merei A.G. Dbhren (3) The works of the Woll-W&scherei & KMmmerei A.G. are in the Southern suburb of D&hren. Their wool­ combing plant is reported to have been the second larg est in Germany before the war and to have employed some 2,200 workers. No information is available regarding i t s present a c tiv ity . The plant has been severely damaged by the R.A.F.
Rubber and Tyres Continental Gummiwerke A.G. Hanover- (1) Vahrenwalder Strasse
Continental Gummiwerke A.G. Nordhafen (1) Continental Gummiwerke A.G. Limner (1)
Continental/
- 341
HANOVER (Contd)
TYPE AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVE LOCATION PRIORITY
----
RATING
Rubber and Tyres (Contd)
Continental Gummi werke A.G. Marienwerder (1)
This highly important rubber Concern, which has its head­ quarters in Hanover, holds the foremost place in the Axis production of rubber and synthetic- rubber tyres. The parent factory of the company is in the Vahrenwalder Strasse close to the main railway gooda yards and in the built-up area of the North West corner of the town« The Nordhafen plant is situated west of the railway bridge over the Mittelland Kanal at Vinnhorst and on the South bank of the Nordhafen.
On the $outh bank of the Mittelland Kanai to the West of the Stücken Akkumulatoren Fabrik and near the village of Marienwerder is a new factory (the largest in this area) . belonging to the Continental concern.
The fourth plant of the Continental is the former Excelsior Werke in Limmer in the Western quarter of Hanover.
The number of workers in the Continental plants is probably at least 25,000. The Nordhafen works alone are believed to employ 15,000 and one report states that a further 7,000 are employed at the new Marien­ werder factory.
Productive capacities of the different works are believed to be as follows:-
Vahrenwalder Str.
The estimated total pre-war capacity of this works (excluding bicycle and motor-cycle tyres) is believed to have been 55°,000 per month.
Estimated current output is 51,000 truck and motor tyres and 27,000 aero tyres per month.
Nordhafen.
I'his is believed to be a mixing plant for synthetic rubber compound supplying the ready-compounded stock to Continental* s other factories in the Vehrenwalder Strasse and at Marienwerder.
Limmer.
This is Continental* s reclaim plany. It is also engaged on the production of cycle tyres and mechanical rubber goods.
Marienwerder/
MOVER (Contd) TIPS AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVE LOCATION PRIORITY
RATING
Rubber and Tyres (Contd) Continental Gummiwerke Contd.
Marienwerder This plant has been b u ilt since the outbreak of war. I t is believed to be one o f the p rin cipal German tyre fa c to rie s and is estimated to have a capacity o f 75,000 truck and motor tyres per month. Most other types and pneumatic ty re s,so lid tyres, certain specialized products, and a va riety of general rubber goods are also believed to be made here on an important scale.
Nptei Two further plants possibly belonging to the Continental concern are at Hanover-Seelze and Hanover- Linden,St&rke Strasse. The Seelze plant is new and is probably not yet complete. I t could be an altern ative site fo r a reclaim plant, or may be simply fo r storage purposes. The Linden plant was formerly known as the Mitteland Gummiwerke A.G. liquidated in 19A0 and believed taken over by Continental. Before the war the factory, was engaged on the manufacture of mechanical rubber goods.
Hansens Gummi & Packungswerke W ölfel (3 This firm makes mechanical rubber goods, e le c tr ic a l in sulation hose, b eltin g e tc . P rio r to the war some 600 to 700 workers were employed.
I t is believed that since the war certain departments of the works have been converted to the manufacture of m ilitary and c iv ilia n gas masks. (Westphalia).
See under Hagen — — oOo——- HATTINGEN (Westphalia) See under Bochum ———oOo—— HÄUSERN (BADEN)
See under Waldshut —— oOo— —
HEIDELBERG (Bajffi)
49 25' N. 8 50' E« 415 miles: (85,000)
Heidelberg, though chiefly known as a University town, has several industries. In addition to those mentioned below there are a number of smaller engineering works, makers of surgical and scientific instruments, cement works, and chemical factories.
Heidelberg lies in the narrow valley of the Neckar immediately before it leaves the hills and flows through the plain to join the Rhine at Mannheim 12 miles to the N.W.
TYPE AND IESCRIPTICN OF OBJECTIVES LOCATION PRIORITY
SngtoarAnfi m iro
H. Fuchs
Rohrbach (j)
The H.Fuchs Waggon Fabrik A.G-. are makers of wagons of all kinds, especially tank and refrigerator railway wagons. They are reported to be the sole makers of a new type which is being much used on the German railways and which dispenses with longitudinal girders by rivetting the containers directly on to the bogies. Two-axle tankers of this type can hold JOO hectolitres and the four- axle type 600 hectolitres. Fuchs employed several hundred workers in 19 J9• Their works are in the suburb of Rohrbach, one mile south of Heidelberg»
Stotz
Heidelberg (-)
The Stotz Kontakt G.m.b.H., makers of electrical fittings, were reported in 194J to be in process of transferring from Mannheim-Neckarau to Heidelberg.
Vereinigte Westdeutsche Waggonfabrik A.G. Heidelberg (j)
This firm is engaged on the manufacture of tank wagons and railway trucks.
-344-
HEIDENAU (Saxonv) 51° 58' N. 13° 53' E. 606 miles: (17,200)
Heidenau lies on the West bank of the Elbe 8 miles S.E. of Dresden and is on the main line from Dresden to Pirna. It is a small town of no industrial importance.
TYPE AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVES LOCATION PRIORITY
RATING
Gasworks Heidenau (3)
The Gasversorgung Ostsachsen A.G., made in 1936, 420 million cubic feet of gas, which was supplied to no less than 107 localities.
— — 0O0— —
HEUENHEIM (Wurttemberg) 48° 40* N. 10° 10' E; 495 miles (28,000)
Heidenheim is on the main line from Nürnberg to Ulm, 20 miles N.E. of Ulm. The chief industries are textiles and machinery and it is the market town for the surrounding agricultural district.
Engineering and Armaments
J.M.Voith Heidenheim (2)
Before the war these works specialised in machinery for the paper and pulp-making industries and in water turbines. They are also designers and makers of a special marine propulsion device, which is universally known as the "Voith-Schneider” system. Several thousand workers are reported to be employed here, including a large proportion of foreigners.
The firm is believed to have a research department which is engaged on perfecting combustion engines of small volume.
J .Erhard Heidenheim (.3)
The Süddeutsche Armaturenfabrik Bronce und Eisengiesserei Johannes Erhard, makers of valves and fittings, including slide-valves, and flow meters and indicators were reported in 1943 to be employing some 700 foreign labourers. There were 800 workers in this factory in 1939« Max Ziegler Heidenheim (3)
This firm is reported to be engaged on the manufacture of agricultural machinery and to employ 1,200 workers.
Piltz/
- -
HEIDENHEIM (Württemberg) (Contd.) TYPE AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVES LOCATION PRIORITY
-------------— ----- RATING
Engineering and Armaments (Contd. ) Piltz & Sohn Friedrichstr. (J)
F.Piltz & Sohn K.G. are makers of equipment for thread grinding and grinding attachments.
Textiles and Rubber
Hartmann A. G. Heidenheim (-)
The Paul Hartmann A.G. manufacture cotton wool, woven bandages, and surgical dressings. They employed some 800 workers in 1939»
Cattunmanufactur A.G. Heidenheim (3) The Wttrttembergische Cattunmanufactur A.G. are bleachers, dyers, and fabricators of silk, rayon, wool and cotton products. They employed some 1,800 workers in 1938 and are now reported to be engaged entirely on Government contracts, including the manufacture of parachutes.
Becker A. G. Heidenheim (j)
The Gummiwerke Becker A.G, are normally makers of rubber rollers and coverings for use in the paper and textile industry. They were reported in 1942 to be employing some 1,800 workers and to be concentrating on the production of gas masks.
- ---- oO o - ----- HEILBRONN (Wtetteanberg) 49° 10' N. 9° 15' E; 445 miles; (73,000) Heilbronn, the third largest city of Württemberg, is on the right bank of the Neckar 30 miles North of Stuttgart, It is on the main railway line from Würzburg to Stuttgart and is a railway junction of some importance. The Neckar has been canalised for large barges as far as Heilbronn and the inland harbour is one of the main stations for this traffic. Heilbronn is the centre of a salt-mining area. In addition to several engineering works the industries include furniture and paper­ making. The neighbouring town of Neckarsulm, 4 miles to the North, is included with Heilbronn in the list below.
Transportation/
- 346 -
HEILBRONN (Württemberg) (Contd. )
TYPE AND DESCRIPTION OF ABJECTIVE LOCATION PRIORITY
RATING
Transportation
Inland Harbour Heilbronn (j) The docks on the Neckar are mainly in the West of the town, but two large new docks have been built at the northern end close to Neckarsulm. The project connecting the Neckar with the Danube at Ulm has not £et been fully carried out but between Mannheim and Heilbronn this canal system is in full operation and a large traffic is handled.
Railway Junction Heilbronn (j) The main line from North to South is Joined inside the town area by an important branch line from BÜmberg via Crailsheim. The main railway station is on the right bank of the river close to the inland harbour.
The railway to Stuttgart crosses the river Neckar immediately W. of the main station, and a branch line diverging at this point leads to Eppingen and Karlsruhe.
Marshalling Yards Heilbronn (3) In 1939 the Heilbronn Marshalling Yards had a capacity to handle 2,000 wagons per 24 hours.
Public Utility Services
Municipal Gasworks Heilbronn (-) This works made 240 million cubic feet of gas in 1936, of which 27 million cu. ft. was sold to Neckarsulm.
Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication Karl Schmidt G.m.b.H. Neckarsulm (j) This firm is among the leading German makers of aluminium pistons.
Other products are aluminium alloys and coatings and gas and oil burning furnaces.
Engineering and Armaments
N. S.U. Werke A.G* Neckarsulm (2) These large works increased their activity very rapidly in the years preceding the war. Their chief products are motorcycles and light military transport. In 1942 they were reported to employ some 4 >000 workers.
E.C.Weipert/
HEILBRONN (Württemberg! (Contd) TYPE AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVE LOCATION PRIORITY
RATING
Engineering & Armaments (Contd)
F.C.Weipert
Weipertstr. (3)
(-)
The firm of Ferdinand C.
Weipert employed, in 1938, some 2»D0 workers and made lathes, planing machines and machine tools.
Maschinenbaugesellschaft Bad str. (-)
This firm makes agricultural machinery, steam ploughs, oil burning motors for agricultural tractors and steam rollers.
Krayl & Gross Salzstr.
J.Weipert & Sbhne Salzstr.
Both these firms are makers of agricultural machinery such as threshing machines, chaff and beet cutters, wine-presses, and ploughshares.
Weisser & Co. Salzstr. (-)
The Eugen Weisser & Co. K.G. make lathes, planing and boring machines,cylinder borers, and other machine tools.
Wolff & Co. Heilbronn (-)
The Jul.Wolff & Co.G.nub.H. are makers of cranes, lifts, winding gear, and rollers. They employed some 200 workers in 1938» Klipper Asbestoc Co.. Heilbronn (-)
The Klipper Asbestos Co., manufacturers of gaskets and sparking plug washers, are reported to have a factory«in Heilbronn. They belong to the Robert Bosch concern.
Chemicals and Explosives Kali Chemie A.G. Heilbronn (3)
These are among the larger chemical works of the Kali Chemie concern. They produce soda ash and ammonium carbonate. They exploit the large salt and brine deposits in the neighbourhood of Heilbronn and have their own brine well in Beckingen on the left bank of the Neckar opposite Heilbronn. The works have a railway goods yard and quays on the Neckar. It is estimated that in 1941 this works produced 200 tons of soda ash per day (or of the total production of Germany proper).
Koepff/
-348-
HEILBRONN (Württemberg) (Contd)
TYPK AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVE LOCATION PRIORITY
RATING
Chemicals and Explosives (Contd)
Koepff Sbhne Heilbronn (-) This firm is one of the leading German makers of gelatine for photographic films and plates.
Salzwerk Heilbronn A.G. Heilbronn (-)
This is a company formed by the city of Heilbronn to work the salt mines belonging to the Municipality. Some 500 workers were employed in 1939«
Food Stuffs
C.H. Knorr A.B. Heilbronn (-)
This firm, whose chief works are at Heilbronn, is a well-known maker of patented foods and milk preparations for infant and invalid diet. Oatmeal, soup cubes, ' and macaroni are among their other products.
- - - -oOo- - - - HEINRICHBÜRG (Westphalia! ♦ (See under Castrop-Rauxel)
- - - - oOo- - - - HEIASTEDT (Brunswick) 52° 15* N. 11° E: 480 miles: (18,000) Helmstedt is 20 milea E. of the town of Brunswick on the main line to Magdeburg. There are large brown-coal deposits in the neighbourhood. Helmstedt has various engineering works which make chiefly machinery for the soap industry, and other small factories of which none individuell of note. Three miles S.E. of Helmstadt near the village of Harbke is one of the principal power stations in Western Germany.
~3k9 -
HELMSTEDT (Brunswick) Contd) TYEE AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVE
P u b lic U t i l i t y Se rv ic e Z ~ ~ Power S ta tio n
LOCATION PRIORITY
RATING
Harbke (1)
The im portant p la n t which com prises th e power s ta tio n a t Harbke and th e two tr a n s f ormer and sw itching s ta tio n s Harbke I and I I i s s itu a te d about 3 m iles S.E. o f H elm stedt and. midway between Brunswick and Magdeburg. W ith an in s ta lle d c a p a c ity o f l j 6 MW, t h i s i s one o f th e p r in c ip a l power s ta tio n s in W estern Germany. The Braunschweigische Kohlen Bergwerke A.G. (BKB), the owning company, re p re s e n ts th e in te r e s t s o f th e E lektrow erke A.G. (EWAG J and P reu ssisch e E le k triz it& ts A.G. (PEA). The s ta tio n provides power f o r th e main d is tr ib u tio n netw orks o f both companies. I t a lso g iv es su p p lie s to th e E le k tr iz itä ts w e r k Sachsen-A nhalt (ESAG) and the D berland- z e n tra le H elm stedt A .G ., in a d d itio n to B .K .B .’ s mines and b riq u e ttin g p la n ts .
The main p la n t in c lu d e s 3 b o ile rh o u se s, the g e n e ra to r house co n tain in g 4 turbo g e n e ra to r s e ts , and an o p e n -a ir tran sfo rm er and sw itching s u b s ta tio n f o r 220 kV and 110 kV which i s known as Harbke I s u b s ta tio n .
Harbke I I tran sfo rm er s ta tio n , 1$ m iles w est o f th e main p la n t, i s p a r t o f th e main g rid and can be brought in to use as a standby f o r Harbke I . su b s ta tio n in th e event o f damage. T h is s ta tio n c o n ta in s p la n t fo r 220 kV and low er v o lta g e s in d u p lic a tio n to Harbke I . Harbke I I i s in p ro cess o f c o n stru c tio n and Harbke 1 i s being extended. On account o f i t s connection to se v e ra l supply system s the Harbke complex occupies an im portant s tr a te g ic p o s itio n in th e g e n e ra l network o f th e country. To th e N. i t i s th e main e a ste rn connecting. p o in t o f EWAG and the w estern connection o f PEA. On 220 kV long d ista n c e lin e s i t connects to th e E . w ith Magdeburg, to th e S. w ith the 5$ MW s ta tio n a t Gross Kayna, and to the W. w ith th e sw itching s ta tio n o f L e h rte .
There i s a 110 kV lin e to K ro ttd o rf, and lo c a l su p p lie s are given a t 50 kV and 15 kV.
Brown coal i s su p p lied from nearby mines (se e under S o lid F u e ls ).
S plit
- 3 5 0 -
HELMSTEDT (Brunswick) Contd) TYPE AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVE LOCATION PRICRITT
RATING
MLjLd Fuels
Kohlen-Bergwerke Helmstedt (-) The Braunschweigische Kohlen- Bergwerke in Helmstedt is the most important of the companies exploiting the brown-coal deposits North and South of Helmstedt.
This company’s mines, briquetting p lan ts, and the large power statio n mentioned above l ie in the d is tr ic t South of the town. In 1937 5,760,000 tons of brown coal and 1,760,000 tons of b riq u ettes were produced. ——oOo—— HEMFURTH
See under Waldeck ——oOo—— HERBORN (Hesse Nassau) 50° 41' N. 8° 19' E: 370 ntllas: (6,000) This is a small in d u stria l town on the Dortmund-Siegen- Frankfurt railway lin e , 12 miles N.W. of Wetzlar and 20 miles S.E. of Siegen.
Iro n and S tag l and FerropA.llo.vs KSnigazug Grube Eibaoh (-) Owned by the Buderus* sehe Eisenwerke A.G., W etzlar, th is iron-ore mine is situated Eibach, a small mining village of 800 inhabitants 6 miles N.W. of Herborn and 16 m. N.W. of W etzlar. The mine i s on the important Lahn-Dill iron-ore deposit south of Siegen.
Engineering and Armaments Berkenhoff & Drebes A.G. W etzlar. Herborn ( j) The branch works at Herborn belonging to th is company have a wire-drawing plant and a foundry, and are manufacturers of wire cables and machinery fo r cable railways; they also make diamond dies and machinery connected with cabinet­ making and Joinery. ——oOo——
HERFORD/
- 351 -
H E R F O R D (Westphalia) 52° N. 8° AD* E: 380 miles: (40,000) Herford is 8 miles N.E. of B ielefeld on the main line from Berlin and Hanover to Hamm and the Rhineland» I t is the junction fo r a branch lin e leading from Detmold. Furniture making is the chief industry of the town and is in the hands of a number of small firm s. There are several minor engineering works and an iron foundry.
TYPE AND DESCRIPT ION OF OBJECTIVE LOCATION PRIORITY
T ransportation Railway Repair Shops Herford (?) These are medium si zed‘shops repairing mainly goods wagons.
Engineering and Armaments Motorenfabrik Herford Herford (3) The Mbtorenfabrik Herford G-.m.b.H, are believed to employ some $00 workers and are makers of gas producers and small d iesel engines.
HERNE Westphalia)/
- 3 5 2 -
HERNE (Westphalia) 51° 35* N. 7° 15» E .: 315 miles: (96,000) Heme is situated in the in d u stria l area of the eastern end of the Ruhr, and lie s between Bodhum to the south, Recklinghausen to the north, Castrop Rauxel to the east, and Wanne E ickel to the west. I ts industry centres around the nearby coal-mines and associated coking and chemi c«3 plants.
The most important c o llie rie s , coking plan ts, and chemical works are lis te d below. In addition, transport f a c ilitie s at Heme are good; the Rhine-Herne Canal flows immediately to the north of the town, and the East-West railway route from Castrop-Rauxel and Dortmund to Gelsenkirchen passes through i t .
TYPE AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVES, LOCATION PRIORITY
BATING
SBOEorta&oa
Railway m arshalling yards Heme (3) These yards are situated to the North-East Of Heme main railway sta tio n . In 1938 they had a capacity of 2,400 wagons per 24 hours.
Canal looks Heme (3) These are the six th set of twin locks on the Rhein-Herne canal.
Canal locks Heme (3) These are the seventh set of twin locks on the Rhein-Herne canal.
Public U tilitie s Power statio n s Power a t Heme is obtained chiefly from the RWE g rid, to which are connected several generating sta tio n s belonging to companies operating coking plants and c o llie rie s in the neighbourhood of the town (see under Solid Fuels).
The larg est of these are given below: - 1. HERGMANNSGLUCK Power Station - 14 ) 2, MDNT CENIS POWER STATION • 20 W . ) (3)
3. GRAP BISMARCK power station - 23 ) 4. CONSOLIDATION power station - 34 )
Gasworks/
- 353 -
LOCATION
Gasworks Herne The municipal gasworks are situated within the built- up area of the town. In 1936 2J0 million cubic feet of gas were purchased from the Bergbau A.G. Lothringen coking plant at Hiltrop.
Solid Fuels
Bergwerksgesellschaft Heme Hibernia A.G» Coking plant.
Known as Shamrock l/ll, this coking plan*; is situated J-J- miles N. of Bochum-Nord station. It has 120 ovens and an annual dry coal capacity of 420,000 tons. , Harpener Bergbau A.G. Herne/ Sodingen
This coking plant adjoins the synthetic-ammonia plant (see under Chemicals and Explosives) and is known as Mont Cenis J/H/ni. It lies N.N.E. of Bochum-Nord station and has 185 ovens with an annual dry coal capacity of 376,000 tons.
Harpener Bergbau A. G» Herne Situated 1 mile West of Herne main station, this coking plant is situated at the Julia pit.
It has 60 ovens and an annual dry coal capacity of 150,000 tons. 1 ,400 workers were employed in 1937.
Friedrich der Grosse coking plant Herne- Bdnnig
Owned by Gewerkschaft des Steinkohlenbergwerks Friedrich der Grosse and situated at BBnnig 2 miles N.N.E. of Herne, this coking plant has 60 ovens and an annual dry coal capacity of 395,000 tons.
Friedrich der Grosse Colliery BÖnnig Adjacent to the above-mentioned coking plant, this colliery had an output of 1,220 million tons of hard coal in 1937, 2,400 workers are reported to be employed in both the colliery and the coking plant.
PRIORITY
RATING
(3)
(3)
(3)
(-)
(3)
Chemicals/
-354-
LOCATION PRIORITY
RATING
Mont Cenis Ammonia plant
Owned by the Harpener Bergbau A .G ., th is is the larg est o f the Mont Cenis type synthetic ammonia plants in Germany.
Ammonia, n itr ic and sulphuric acids, ammonium sulphate and n itra te, and sodium n itra te are the ch ief products.
Heme/ (2) Sodingen
(D etails of coke and coal production apid power are to be found under ’’Solid Fuels” and "Public U tilitie s " re sp e ctiv e ly.)
HERSFELD (Hesse Nassau) 50° 50* N. 9° 40* E: 430 miles: (14,000) Hersfeld is 20 miles North of Fulda and is on the main B erlin- Frankfort railw ay lin e . Apart from the engineering works mentioned below, spinning and cloth manufacture are the ch ief industries of th is town.
Bngifl^riflg Armaments Benno Schilde Hersfeld (3) The Benno Schilde Maschinenbau A.G. are important makers of in d u strial furnaces and heating and drying plants of a ll kinds. They sp ecia lise in large gas- heated plant. They doubled th eir number of workers during the three years before the war and in 1939 were employing some 1,400 people. Benno Schilde are also one of the leading German makers of mining ven tila tio n equipnent. — ~o0o— — HETTSTEDT (Saxony) See under Eisleben
— — 0O0———
HEXÜEBRECK/
- 355 -
HEYDEBRECK ( S ile s ia ) 50° 20* N. 18° 15* E: 800 m iles: (6,500) Heydebreck i s a sm all town s itu a te d to the e a s t of K osel and th e west o f Blechhammer. I t s railw ay m arsh allin g y ard s and r e p a ir shops, lis te d below, a re o f im portance as th e y serve the two la rg e o i l p la n ts a t Blechhammer N orth and South« There i s l i t t l e in d u stry in Heydebreck and none o f in d iv id u a l im portance.
TYPE AND DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVE LOCATION PRIORITY
RATINE
In M K K te tio n M arshalling Y ards, Railway Workshops and Ju n ctio n The m arsh allin g y ard s l i e n o rth ­ west o f the Blechhammer South s y n th e tic o i l p la n t and to th e so u th -e a st o f K osel. They a re b eliev ed to have a c a p a c ity of 2,500 wagons per 24 hours. The . N orth-South railw ay lin e from B reslau to Bogumin, th e lin e from G leiw itz and the Upper S ile s ia n i n d u s tr i a l re g io n to the e a s t, and the lin e from N eustadt to the W est, form a ju n c tio n a t th e n o rth e rn end o f th e m arsh allin g y a rd s.
Heydebreck (2)
HUBEN (Rhineland)
o
°
51 10» N. 6 55’ E: 305 m iles: (22,000) H ilden i s 7 m iles S.E. of D ü sse ld o rf. A part from th e works mentioned below th e re are no in d u s trie s o f im portance.
E ngineering and Armaments Deutsche Rbhrenwerke H ilden ( j ) The Deutsche Rbhrenwerke A.G. (Poensgenwerk) whose main works a re in D ü sseld o rf- L ie re n fe ld , have a branch fa c to ry in H ilden engaged on the m anufacture o f tubes and f i t t i n g s .
HILDESHEIM (Hanover) 52° 10» N. 10° E: 435 m iles: (65,000) H ildesheim i s 20 m iles S .E . o f Hanover and i s a railw ay ju n ctio n o f some im portance. The town c e n tre i s la rg e ly b u ilt o f h a lf-tim b e re d houses and has p reserv ed i t s m ediaeval c h a ra c te r. There are v a rio u s in d u s tr ie s , m ostly in th e hands o f sm all u n d ertak in g s. In a d d itio n to the works mentioned below th e town’ s a c t i v i t i e s in clude th e m anufacture o f a g ric u ltu ra l m achinery and a sugar re fin e ry .
T ra n s p o rta tio n /
- 356 -
THff AND- DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTIVE LOCATION PRIORITY
' BATING
im K d & io n
Railway Junction Hildesheim (3) Hildesheim is on the main line from Berlin via Magdeburg to West Germany. This is an alternative to the Berlin-Hanover route which runs roughly parallel further to the North.
Two branch lines lead North from Hildesheim to Hanover and Lehrte where they join the Berlin-Hanover line. A third branch connects Hildesheim with the Brunswick-Hanover line.
To the South a branch line leads to Goslar and the Harz district. Hildesheim has a goods station and large marshalling yards close to the main railway station in the northern quarter of the town.
Engineering and Armaments
Senkingwerk Senkingstr. (3) The Senkingwerk Ahlbom A.G. specialised in peace time in the manufacture of ovens for domestic and industrial use, complete bakery installations, laundry machinery, and heating apparatus. They employed some 3,000 workers before the war. This is believed to be still their main business, but they now also specialise in field kitchens, field bakeries and laundries, ships galleys,etc.
Ahlbom Lfcntzelstr. (3)
The Eduard Ahlbom A.G. are makers of dairy machinery and cooling apparatus.
They employed 1,200 workers before the war. The works are now believed to be engaged on armament production.
&Lbbqr anfl Tyrys
Wetzel G-iimmi werke Hildesheim (3)
The Wetzel Gummiwerke A.G. employed 2*00 workers in 1939 and manufactured surgical gloves, tennis balls, and various technical rubber goods. They are now believed to be making anti-gas clothing.
Asbest & Gummi G.m.b.H. Hildesheim (3)
Paul Reipert Pfeiffer & Co.
These three firms have the same range of products as the Wetzel A.G. mentioned above, but are believed to employ less than 200 workers each.
- 357 -
HINDENBURG- (Silesia)
50° 20’ N. 18° 45* E: 830 miles: (130,000) Hindenburg is the central of the 3 adjacent mining towns in the extreme S. Eastern corner of Upper Silesia, the others being Gleiwitz and Beuthen. The former Polish frontier runs within 2 miles of the Southern and S. Eastern borders of the town. Seven of the large Upper Silesian coal mines lie to the N. and S. of the town, one of these being within the Northern part of the built-up area and adjacent to the large steel works of the VOHAG.
Transportation
Marshalling Yards Hindenburg (2) N.E. of the town and close to the Hedwigswunsch coal mine, there are inportant goods and marshalling yards.
Railway Repair Shops Hindenburg (2)
These workshops are believed to enploy some 2,500 workers and to undertake the repair of locomotives in addition to other rolling stock.
Public Utility Services
Gas Works Haidens tr.
The gas works of the Verbandsgaswerk Beuthen-Hindenburg G.m.b. H. are immediately N. of the railway on the Eastern side of the town, and in 1936, made 130 and purchased a further 290 million cubic feet of gas from the Borsig Kokswerke and the Preussag.
Power Station Zaborze (1)
I
The Zaborze or "Hindenburg" thermal power station is owned by the Schlesische Elektrizitäts-/u. Gas A.G. (O.E.W.) Gleiwitz, and has an Installed capacity of 146 MW.
It is situated 1 mile S. of Hindenburg and adjacent to the Königen-Luise hard-coal mine (see under SOLID FUELS). Built in 1898, and several times rebuilt and extended, the capacity is reported to have recently been doubled, but this has not yet been confirmed.
The plant has 4 boilerhouses, a machine house, a transformer and switch house, and a sub­ station for 60 12 V. and possibly 20 kV lines.
Long distance 60 W lines connect with Zawadski, Cosel, Beuthen, Preussengrube and Gleiwitz.
- 358 -
HINDENBURG (continued.)
6 kV underground cables, and possibly 20 kV overhead transmission lines, connect locally.
A power station of similar capacity, at Chorzow, immediately across the frontier, is owned by a subsidiary coup any of O.E.W.
These two stations are often referred to as the Upper Silesian Power Stations (Oberschlesische Elektrizitätswerke).
Solid Fuels
Delbrück Ooking Plant S. of Hindenburg (J)
Owned by the Preussische Bergwerks-/ und Hütten- A. Gr., this coking plant lies adjacent to the Delbrück Colliery, two miles South of Hindenburg station. In 1943 it was estimated that this plant had 176 ovens and a dry coal capacity of 675,000 tons p. a.
Borsigwerk ooking plant N.E. of Hindenburg (3)
This coking plant lies 3 miles N.E. of Hindenburg station and is owned by the Borsig-Kokswerke A.G. It has 5$ ovens and an estimated dry coal capacity of 355,000 tons per annum.
Skalley ooking plant 3. of Hindenburg (3)
Also belonging to the Borsig-Kökswerke A. G*, this ooking plant lies 1J miles S. of Hindenburg station. It hcs. 60 ovens and an estimated dry coal oapacity of 345,000 tons per annum.
Königin Luis e-Ostf eld u. S.E. of Hindenburg (3) Westfeld and Delbrück Collieries
Belonging to Preussische Bergwerke-Und- IJÜtten A. G», these mines, in 1937, produced 4,375,000 tons of coal.
Hedwigswunsoh Colliery N.E. of Hindenburg (3)
Owned by the Borsig-Kokswekke A. G. this Colliery lies to the East of the Borsigwerk coking plant. Its output of coal in 1937 was 1,815,000 tons.
- 359 -
HINDENBURG (continued)
Ludwigsblflck Colliery N. of Hindenburg ,(3)
This colliery is also owned by the Borsig-Kokswerke A.G. and in 1937 had an output of 1,670,000 tons of coal.
Oastellengo Colliery N.E. of Hindenburg (3) Owned by the Gewerkschaft Oastellengo Abwehr, and situated near the Borsigwerk station, this colliery had an output of 2,345,000 tons of coal in 1937»
Abwehr Colliery N. of Hindenburg (3) Situated at Mikultschutz to the N. of Hindenburg and owned by the Gewerkshaft Oastellengo Abwehr, this colliery had an output of 1,260,000 tons of coal in 1937.
Iron Steel & Ferro Alloys/
- 360 -
HINDENBURG (contd.) Iron Steel & Ferro Alloys VOHAG Donner smarckhtttte Hindenburg (2) The Dounersmarckhfttte steel works of the Vereinigte Obersohlesische Hüttenwerke A.G. are in the northern quarter of Hindenburg and comprise foundries «rd rolling mills« There are 4 blast aid 3 open hearth furnaces with a capacity of 100,000 tons of crude steel per annum« Among the products of the works are tubes, boilers and large metal containers, steel girders and frames, and machine tools« (For further particulars of the VOHAG concern sea under GLEIWITZ. )
w
Engineeriiy; aid Armaments A« Deichsel A.G. Adolf Deichsel (3) Str« The Adolf Deichsel Drahtwerk u. Seilfabriken A.G. are manufacturers of wire and wire ropes« They employed some 1 ,200 workers in 1938.
oOo— — HIRSCHBERG (Silesia) 50° 55’ N. 15° 2*5’ E: 690 miles: (34,000) Hirsohberg is in the Southern part of Lower Silesia and is on the railway line from Görlitz to Glatz. It is a tourist centre for visitors to the Riesengebirge. Apart from those mentioned below Hirsohberg has no inportant industries.
Public Utility Services Gas Works Hirsohberg (3) This works is owned by the A.G. fttr Gas und Elektrizität Kölln, Berlin, and in 1936 purchased 159 million cubic feet of gas from the Ferngas Schlesien A.G., for resale.
Engineering and Armaments z Carl Zeiss Hirsohberg (-) A new branch factory of Carl Zeiss, Jena is reported to have been erected during the war in Hirsohberg and to have begun production in the autumn of 1942, at which time 500 workers were employed. This number is now believed to have been increased up to 2,000. A wide range of optical instruments is sais to be produced. The plant is said to work in conjunction with the new Zeiss factory at Görlitz. Definite evidence of the existence of this plant has not yet been obtained.
Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper/
- 361 -
Zellwolle A.G. Hirschberg (3) The Schlesische Zellwolle A.G. are makers of viscose staple fibre and prior to the war employed some 900 workers» Their output was then approximately 70 tons per day.
Ewald Schoeller & Co. Kummer sdorf (-) These paper and cellulose manufacturers (formerly the Schlesische Cellulose and 9 papier Fabriken A.G.) are in Kummersdorf, a Southwestern suburb of Hirschberg, Approximately 600 workers were employed in 1939. This firm has several branch factories and saw-mills in Silesia,
Leather
Heinrich Knock Hirschberg (3) The Lederfabrik Heinrich Knoch A.G. are important tanners and manufacturers of sole and upper leather. Approximately 1,500 workers were employed at this plant in 1937. .
— --- 0O0— — -
HIRSCHFELDS ( Saxony ) See under ZITTAU
— — -0O0---—
H 5CHST/MAIN (Hesse Nassau) See under Frankfort/Main
— — 0O0— — —
HQF (Bavaria)
50° 20» N. 12° 25* E: 550 milesj (44,000) Hof is in the extreme Northeastern quarter of Bavaria close to the Southern border of Thuringia. It is on one of the main railway lines from North to South Germany through the Thüringer Wald. Textiles form the chief industry and there are several spinning and weaving mills in addition to the example mentioned below. Hof has a number of sausage factories and large-scale breweries.
Transportation
Railway Repair Shops Hof 0) These are medium-sized repair shops undertaking the repair of goods wagons.
/public Utility Services
362 -
Public Utility Services
Gas Works go f In 1936, this municipal works made 136 million cubic feet of gas.
Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper Neue Spinnerei jfof The Neue Baumwoll-Spinnerei und Weberei Hof A.G. is a large spinning and weaving factory which has two separate works in Hof. In 1938 Werk I had 175,000 spindles and 1,400 weaving looms; Werk II, a spinning mill only, had 20,000 spindles. Approximately 2,000 workers were employed.
—~— —0O 0— —
HOHENLIMBURG (Westphalia) See under Lethmathe
0O 0
-m-
HOHENSTEIN-ERNSTTHäL (Saxony) 50° 45* N. 12° 45* E: 560 miles: (18,000)
Hohenstein-Ernstthal is 10 miles East of Chemnitz on the main line to Dresden. Its industry is chiefly textiles, in particular knitted goods, braids and trimmings. None of the factories is' individually of
importance.
— «<-o0o— —~
HOMBERG- (RHEINPROVINZ)
51° 30’ N. 6° 40* E: 292 miles: (27,000)
Homberg lies on left bank of the Rhine opposite Duisburg-Ruhrort.
Industry in the area is concerned mainly with coke coal and synthetic oil and the plants connected with these are all owned by the various Rheinpreussen companies.
Solid Fuels
Homberg coking plant
Owned by Gewerkschaft Steinkohlenbergwerk Rheinpreussen, the plant is situated 3i miles N.W. of Homberg station and Just N.E. of M8rs at Rheinpreussen Pit 5» in 3 batteries. There are 355 coke ovens having an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 654>°°° tons. Gas is supplied to the Ruhr gas grid.
Pattberg coking plant
Owned by Gewerkschaft Rheinland, the plant is situated 4 miles N»W. of M&rs station or Pattberg pit 1/2, There are AO coke ovens working which have an estimated anrtual dry coal capacity of 287,000 tons. AD additional coke ovens were still under construction at the end of 1943» This plant operates in conjunction with the synthetic oil plant ( see under "Liquid Fuels").
Rheinpreussen colliery
The Rheinpreussen colliery,which includes the Rheinland colliery, is owned by Gewerkschaft Steinkohlenbergwerk "Rheinpreussen". The pits are situated S.W. and West of Homberg station.
In 1937 the output of hard coal amounted to 3,449,000 tons.
Liculd fuels and substitutes Rheinpreussen synthetic oil plant
Homberg (3)
N.W. of Iffirs (j)
S.W. & W.of (3) Homberg
Bömberg (2)
This Fischer-Tropsch synthetiic oil plant is owned by Treibstoff A.G. Rheinpreussen and is situated 3? miles N.W. of Homberg station.
The plant operates in conjunction with the adjoining coking plant (see unfler "Solid Fuels").
The output of the plant is estimated at 190,000 tons of oil products per annum.
-364-
H O M B U R G (Saar) 49° 20» N. 7° 20» E: 370 miles: (26,000) Homburg is situated in the extreme East of the Saar, 6 nd 1 es North of Zweibrücken. I t is a railway junction of some local importance. There are various engineering works, mostly on a small scale.
T ransportation Railway Junction Homburg (3) Two railway lin e s coning from the direction of Mainz and Mannheim respectively meet in Homburg.
In a w esterly d irectio n three lin e s diverge from the town and lead to Neunkirchen, Saarbrücken and Zweibrucken.
Public U tility Services Power Station Homburg (3) This thermal power sta tio n belongs to the Pfalzwerke A.G. and is situated in Homburg proper.
I t has an in sta lle d capacity of 60 MW. Two long­ distance 100 kV lin es connect to Mannheim, one via K aiserslautern and one via Landau.
Engineering and Armaments Klein Pumpen A.G. Indust r i egelande (-) The Klein Pumpen A.G. belong to the Klein Schanzlin und Beoker A.G. of Frankenthal. They are makers of centrifugal and piston pumps and employed some 150 workers in 1939 • Schwinn A.G. Burgenlandstr. (-) This film belongs to the Hoesch A.G. and ecployed some 200 workers in 1939. They are makers of armatures, chains and a ll kinds of swaged forgings. —-o0o-—
HDHECKE (Westphalia) 51° 24* N. 8° 38» E. 380 miles: (700) Hoppeoke is a small town 25 miles south of Paderborn. I t has several small lig h t engineering works, and in addition the important accumulator factory mentioned below.
Engineering & Armaments Hoppeoke Aocuraulatoren Fabrik A.G. Hoppeoke (2) These works manufacture accumulators of a ll types including submarine accumulators. They are believed to employ about 600 workers.
-------0 O 0 - —
- 365 -
tt HORSELGAU (Thuringia) 50° 55* N. 10° 35* E; 470 m iles: (1,100) This is a small town 5 j miles west of Gotha. I t has^no industry of importance other than the rubber works lis te d below.
Rubber and tyres
Vereinigte Gothania Werke A.G. Hörselgau (j) This firm manufactures hose of a ll types, mechanicals and soles and heels. They employed about 400 workers before the war. - -----oOo-------
H O X T E R (Westphalia) 51° 46* N. 9° 25* E; 410 miles; (8,400) This small town lie s on the River Weser appraximately 30 miles east of Paderborn. I t has no industries o f importance other than the manufacture of rubber thread, mainly in the hands of the one firm liste d below.
Rubber and tyres
HÖxtersche Gummif&den- Höxter (-) fabrik Emil Amts. K. G.
This firm is a manufacturer of mechanicals, especially rubber thread. I t normally employed 100 workers, and produced over 1 ^ of German thread for the domestic market and also exported to some extent. — —oOo—— - H U R T H ' (Rhineland) See under Köln (Cologne) ——•oOo— —
H U L S (Westphalia) See under MARL.
—o0o<
- 366 -
IBBENBUREN (Westphalia)
52° 15* N. 7° 45* E; 340 miles: (11,000) Ibbenbüren is approximately halfway between Osnabrück and Rhein^, on the main railway from Berlin via Hanover to Holland. It is th^ centre of a small coalfield at the Western end of the Teutoburger Wald. The principal mining company, and an. electric power station at Ibbenbüren, are mentioned below. There are no other industries of importance.
Public Utility Services
Electric Power Station Ibbenbüren (2) This thermal station was built before 1920. Owned by the Nieders&chsische Kraftwerks A.G-. , it is situated about 15 miles West of Osnabrück on the State-owned Ibbenbüren mines. The station has recently been considerably increased in capacity and it may be intended to make it a base-load plant.
At present its installed capacity is believed to be 65 MW.
Associated with the generating station is a sub-station, to which 220 kV, 100 kV, and 50 kV transmission lines of the R.W.E. grid are connected.
Solid Fuels
Preussische Berwerks A.G* Ibbenburen (3) The preussische Bergwerks & Hütten A.G» are the largest coal-mining undertaking in this area. They own seven pits in the vicinity of Ibbenbüren, which in 1936 had a total output of 800,000 tons of coal. Some 2,500 workers were employed.
-----0O0-----
TDAR-OBERSTBIN (Rhineland) 49° 40* N. 7° 20» E: 350 miles: (23,000) This town is on the river Nahe and the main line which runs from Bingen up the Nahe valley to the Saar territory. It has developed a highly specialised industry in the cutting, polishing and preparation of precious and semi-precious stones for jewellery and for technical purposes. Various synthetic substitutes for these stones are produced and Idar -Ober stein is one of the main centres of research in this direction. The industry is in the hands of a great number of individually small firms and workshops and that mentioned below serves only as an example. There are also several makers of watch chains, clock­ work, and similar small metal products.
Engineering and Armaments./
-367-
Engineering and Armaments Hermann Wild Idar-Oberstein (-) The Deutsche E delsteingesellschaft verm.
Hermann Wild A.G. are makers of jewellery and sim ilar a rtic le s and.claim to have a v ariety of patents fo r synthetic stones suitable fo r in d u strial purposes.
------ Q U O — — —
ILMENAU (Thuringia) 50° 40» N. 10° 55» E: 485 miles; (16,000) Ilmenau is 25 m iles to the South of E rfurt and is in the midst of the Thüringer Wald. I t i s one of the to u rist resorts of th is region but has also several specialised industries such as thermometers and glass instruments, porcelain, and colours for the printing industry Engineering and Armaments A lt, Eberhardt & JSger Ilmenau (-) The Thüringische Glas-Inst runent en Fabrik A lt, Everhardt & Jager A.G. are makers of thermometers, glass instruments for laboratory use, and other sim ilar hollow glass-ware.
Sophienhtttte Ilmenau (-) The Glasfabrik Sophienhtttte make a wide range of glassware for laboratory and medical use and are also sp e cia lists in vacuun flasks.
—o0o—————
ILSM3URG (Province Saxony) 51° 55' N. 10° 20* Bs 4£5 miles: (10,000) Ilsenburg is 15 miles East of Goslar on the Northern edge of the Hartz d is tr ic t. Apart from the two works mentioned below and a margarine factory, there are no industries of importance.
Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication Kupferwerk Ilsenburg Ilsenburg (3) The Kvpferwerk Ilsenburg A.G. are producers of e le c tro ly tic copper and of a l l kinds of ro lled , pressed, and forged copper* and brass.
They specialise in copper components for locomotives. Some 400 workers were employed before the war.
Stollberg Hütte Ilsenburg (-) The Fürst Stollberg Hütte is an iron
-368-
smelting worths which formerly belonged to the Magdeburger Werkzeugnaschinenfabrik, makers of machine to o ls. —----oGo----- -
INGOLSTADT (Bavaria) 48° 45’ N* 11° 25* E: 550 miles (32,000) Ingolstadt is on the Danube 45 miles North of Munich on the main lin e to Nürnberg. A branch lin e from Regensburg to Augsburg crosses the main track at th is point. Apart from the important railway rep air shops there are few industries of note.
T yensport at ion
Railway Repair Shops Ingolstadt (2) These works are believed to employ some 3,000 workers and undertake the rejJair of steam and e le c tric locomotives as well as other ro llin g sto ck .
Engineering and Armaments Spinnerei Maschinen A.G. Ingolstadt (3) The Deutsche Spinnerei Maschinen A.G. are makers of spinning and a ll types of te x tile maohineiy including plant fo r rayon works.
They were increasing the number of th e ir workers before the war employed some 2,000 in 1939. The company belohgs to Schubert und Salzer of Chemnitz. The firm ’s present a c tiv ity i s not known but reports suggest armaments components are made.
Ferdinand Krauss Münchener s tr . (-) The Kraumath \e rk , Ferdinand Krauss specialises in the making of planing, sawing and other wood-working machinery. -------0O0--—
INSTERBURG (East Prussia) 54° 40* N. 21° 50» E: 940 miles: (44,000) Insterburg is a highly important railway centre and focal point for the lin es between Germany and the Northern part of the Eastern fro n t. The industries of the town are mostly on a minor scale and are connected with the surrounding ag ricu ltu ral d i s t r i c t .
Transportation Railway Junction Insterburg (2) Seven railway lin es radiate from Insterburg.
The main lin e through T ils it to Riga and Leningrad runs northward from the town and
- 569 -
and also serves the port of Memel for which the branch diverges near Tilsit. Due eastward from Insterburg is a main line to Kowno, Wilna and Minsk. A subsidiary- branch also in a northerly direction connects Insterburg with the Baltic at Karkeln. From the West the two main lines from Konigsberg and from Posen converge at Insterburg. Two further branch lines leading South from the town serve the South Eastern area of East Prussia. There are extensive goods and marshalling yards.
Railway Repair Shops Insterburg (2)
.
These large repair snaps are believed to employ several thousand workers and to undertake the repair of locomotives and rolling stock.
Engineering and Armaments
Preuss & Saemann Insterburg (-) The Maschinenfabrik Preuss & Saemann are makers of agricultural implements and machinery.
Chemicals and Explosives
Dreugwitz Insterburg (-) The Chemische Fabrik Gustav Dreugwitz are manufacturers of roofing felt, tar and rosin products, oils and soaps. They employed some 150 workers before the war.
—— —0O0— — ——
ISERLOHN (Westphalia)
51° 20’ N. 7° 40* E: 340 miles; (36,000) Iserlohn is 12 miles East of Hagen and has an engineering industry of some consequence. This is in the hands of a nunber of small firms and workshops, making wire, iron and brass castings, metal fittings and armatures and a variety of light metal goods.
No individual firm is of sufficient size to warrant special mention but together they make Iserlohn a town of importance to this industry. Iserlohn is two miles East of the river Lenne, along the valley of which there are several other towns, such as Hohenlimburg, Altena and Finnentrop, where similar groups of engineering firms are established.
Engineering and Armaments/
- 370 -
Engineering and Armaments
Dalhaus & Co» Gruner Weg ) Echt ermann Kettenstr ) (3) Mengeringhausen Baarstr. ) The above are three examples of a large number of engineering works, brass founders, and metal-fitting manufacturers in Iserlohn,
—— ——o Oo—— —
ITZEHOE (Schleswig Holstein) 53° 55* N. 9° 30* E: W miles; (21,000) Itzehoe is in the Southern area of Schleswig Holstein 30 miles North West of Hamburg. It is a market town and has a sugar refinery. Apart from the firms mentioned below Itzehoe .has no industries of note» Engineering and Armaments Siemens & Huisch Lindenstr. (-) This firm manufactures a variety of pumps and compressors on a small scale.
Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper Netzfabrik und Weberei Itzehoe (-) The Mechanische Netzfabrik und Weberei A»G» employed some 500 workers before the war» They have a spinning mill with 19,000 spindles and specialise in net manufacture.
-371-
J A U E R (S ilesia) 51° 5* N. 16° w* E: 705 m iles: (15,000) Jauer is 10 miles South of Liegnitz in Lower S ile sia. I ts a c tiv itie s are mainly concerned with tie surrounding agricultural d is tric t and apart from the firm mentioned below there are no industries of importance.
Engineering and Armaments Carl Wolf Jauer (-) «
This firm makes agricultural machinery and implements, axles, springs and farm wagons.
Some 800 workers were employed in *1938.
I ts present a c tiv itie s are not known. -------oOo----- - J E N A (Thuringia) 50° 55» N. 11° J5< E: 510 miles: (69,000) Jena is on the riv e r Saale in the h illy d is tr ic t of Thuringia and is on one of the main railway routes from North to South Germany, through the Th&ringer Wald. I t is the seat of a University. I t s industry centres around tjie highly important works of Carl Zeiss, the leading makers of optical instruments and the famous optical-glass producers Schott imd %nossen« There are various other makers of optical instruments and laboratory implements, the more noteworthy of which are mentioned below.
Transportat ion Railway Junction Jena (j) From the North two main lines comi ng from Weimar and Halle respectively converge at Jena. The main lin e to the South follows the course of the riv e r Saale and leads through the mountains to Hof and Bavaria.
A fourth important branch lin e runs East from v ena to Gera.
Railway Repair Shops Jena (j) There are large railway shops immediately to the North of the main railway sta tio n (known as the Saale Bahnhof) in the North Eastern quarter of the town.
Public U tilitie s E lectric Power S tation j e n a (j) This plant which is believed to have a capacity of 24 MW, is owned by Carl Zeiss. I t is situ a te d w ithin the b u ilt up area of the town.
-372-
Engineering and Armaments
Carl Zeiss Carl Zeiss Str. (1) The works of this world-famous concern are in the centre of the town and are housed in a group of buildings several storeys high including one skyscraper building of 17 storeys. Several thousand workers are employed. The great majority of the work requires a high degree of specialised skill and there is an elaborate system of training schools for apprentices* It is believed that no foreign labour is employed in Jena and because of the nature of the work, there is a probably unique concentration of highly skilled labour in this town. Zeiss have now three and possibly four large associated factories in Dresden, (Zeiss Ikon Werke A. G.) and branch factories are known to have been established in Hirschberg and Goriits in Silesia« Zeiss controlled affiliated companies are at Stuttgart, Berlin, Rathenow and Vienna. Jena remains, however, the chief training centre for the concern and is by far the largest of the Zeiss works. It turns out the whole range of precision optical instruments required by the armed forces.
These instruments are made in their entirety by the Zeiss works, of which one section is devoted to the casting, grinding and polishing of the lenses, while another section deals with the Complete manufacture of the precision metal parts of the instruments. The apprentice schools mentioned above, train workers for each of these two sections of the industry. It is worth noting that the Zeiss works at Jena are not an ordinary commercial conoern/ but since 1891 have been in the hands of a trust.
The profits belong to the workers on a co­ partnership basis and to the Jena University.
It is believed that the Jena Works of Zeiss alone eqploy some 12,000. workers.
The Zeiss company have their own1 private power station in Jena; it is believed to have a capacity of 24 MW. (See under "public Utilities").
Schott <& Genossen Otto Schott Str. (1)
The Jenaer Glaswerke Schott & Genossen is situated in the Southern part of the town close to the West-Bahnhof. These large works were taken over in 1919 by the Carl Zeiss Trust and can be regarded as a second factory of the Zeiss concern in Jena.
/ The
- 373 -
(
The Schott works concentrate mainly on the smelting and casting of optical glass but they are also equipped to grind, polish, and complete the production of lenses.
Franz Hering Am Marktplatz (3) Gerhard Heydrich Jena (3) Steigerwald & Uthardt Löbstedt (3) Erich KÖ liner Urbanstr. (3) The above are four of a number of smaller factories in Jena making instruments for laboratory use.
—T——0O0— ——
- 374 -
K A C H L E T (Bavaria) 48° 35' N. 13° 25’ E: 635 miles; (2) The Kachlet clam and power statio n are situated on the riv er Danube, 2g- miles west of Passau and close to the Austro-German fro n tie r. The power sta tio n is the larg e st of the 35 hydro-electric power statio n s planned by the Rhein-Main-Donau A.G. for th e ir dual scheme of providing fo r navigation between the rivers Rhine and Danube v ia the riv e r Main, and for the production of electricity^ The dam creates a deep-water channel in the riv e r above Passau, enabling normal Danube shipping to navigate up as far as Regensburg without trans-shipment.
The power statio n has an in stalled capacity of 5& MW. and is designed fo r an ultim ate capacity of 70 MW. The plant consists of the dam, the power house and 2 ship locks.
A transform er sta tio n is situ ated on the l e f t bank of the riv e r, north-east of the power sta tio n , and is owned by Bayernwerk A. Gr. Current a t 20 kV is given to local consumers of the Ostbayrische Stromversorgungs A.G* A 110 kV double-circuit line connects to Nürnberg via Regensburg, and a further lin e connects with the Austrian tran s­ mission system.
oOo—
KAISERSLAUTERN (Palatinate) 49° 30' N. 7° 45' E: 375 miles; (70,000) K aiserslautern is in the centre of the Bavarian P alatin ate of which i t i s , next to Ludwigshafen, the larg est town. I t has a considerable industry which includes several engineering works and foundries. There are a number of te x tile works specialising p articu larly in wound dressings and bandages. K aiserslautern is an important railway Junction fo r the P alatinate and for the tr a f f ic to and from the Saar.
Transportation
Railway Junction K aiserslautern (3) Two lin es coming from the Upper Rhine d is tric t join at K aiserslautern close to the main railway sta tio n , which is on the Southern • edge of the town. To the East the main lin e le ads to Neunkirchen and the Saar te rrito ry and two branch lin es diverge Southwards to P irmasens and Northwards to Mainz. There ape la rge mar aha 1 l i ng yards immediately to the Southwest of the main station.
Marshal 1 ing Yard & Railway Workshops Kaiserslautern (3) The important Railway Workshops and the E insiedlerhof Marshalling yard lie west of the town. The workshops, equipped to rep air both locomotives and wagons, were reported to employ 2,500 workers in 1943.
The Marshalling Yard and sorting sidings lie west of the workshops; the yard is long and narrow, extending 5,500 yards in a ENE-WSW direction, and has a capacity fo r 5,500 wagons per 24 hows. I t deals w ith the heavy tra ffic which flows in a w est-easterly d irectio n , between Saarbrücken and Neunkirchen in the west to Ludwigshafen, Mannheim, and central and eastern Germany.
Enginnering and Armaments G. M. P faff A.G. W ittelsbacherstr. (2) These works are normally makers of a well-known sewing machine. They occupy a large area of ground in the South-Western quarter of the town close to the main railway line# In 1959 they employed 5,000 workers and are now believed to be making small aims and small-arms components.
Reports suggest that some 6-7,000 workers were employed in 1542.
Eisenwerk K aiserslautern Barbaros sastr. (5) The Eisenwerk K aiserslautern A.G. employed approximately 1,000 workers in 1959 and are iron and steel founders, bridge constructors, and makers of enamelled baths and metal containers and -of a ll kinds of heating and air-conditioning apparatus. Their works cover a large area alongside the railway in the South Eastern quarter of the town.
Gebrüder P fe iffe r Barbarossastr. (-) This firm specialises in grinding and other machinery and apparatus for the cement, chalk, and chemical industries. They employed 300 workers in 1’959. Their works adjoin those of the Eisenwerk mentioned above.
Guss & Armaturwerk Pirm asenserstr. (5) The Guss & Armaturwerk K aiserslautern are iron founders and makers of iron piping for drainage purposes, fittin g s and c a st-iro n pumps for agricultural purposes and sewage works. They employed some 1,200 workers in 1959. The works are in the South Western quarter of the town.
Reports suggest th at a part of the works is now engaged on shell cases.
Zsohooke Werke A.G. M ainserstr. (5) The Zsohooke Werke A.G. are makers of water- and gas-cooling in sta lla tio n s . They specialise also in wooden apparatus, steel and wood furniture, milk separators, and b u tter chums. In 1959 they employed some 600 workers.
376
Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper
Kammgarnspinnerei Schonstr. (-) The Kammgarnspinnerei Kaiserslautern A.G. are wool combers and spinners. Their factory, which had 130,000 spindles in 1938 is in the North-Western quarter of the town. In 1939 some 200 workers were employed.
Emil Bender Kaiserslautern (-) The. Kaiserslauterer Verband-Stoff Fabrik Emil Bender G. m.b.H. are specialists in wound dressings, elastic plasters, and bandages.
-----o0o— ---
KAMP-LINTFORT (Rhineland) 51° 30’ N. 6° 35* E: 290 miles: (23,000) Kamp-Lintfort is a municipality recently formed by amalgamating the villages of Kamp, HSrstgen, and Lintfort which are situated 10 miles East of Geldern in. the Lower Rhine district. The industry centres round the important coal mine mentioned below.
Solid Riels
Friedrich Heinrich Kamp-Lintfort (3) This coal mine, which belongs to the Steinkohlenbergwerk Friedrich Heinrich A.G., has two pitheads and in 1938 produced 2,250,000 tons of hard coal. There is also a coking plant with 260 ovens and an annual rated dry
s
coal capacity of 600,000 tons. 4,500 workers were employed in 1938.
- 377 -
KARLSRUHE (Baden) 49° 05* N. 8° 25» E: 415 m iles: (190,000) A lthough K arlsruhe i s th e c a p ita l and th e a d m in istra tiv e c e n tre of Baden, in d u s tr ia lly i t i s by no means as im portant as Mannheim, th e la r g e s t c i t y in th e p ro v in ce.
S itu a te d on th e main lin e from W estern Germany to I ta ly v i a S w itzerland , K arlsruhe i s today o f c o n sid e ra b le importance a s a tra n s p o rt c e n tr e . I t i s on t h i s ro u te th a t th e b u lk o f c o a l su p p lie s from th e Ruhr to I t a l y i s tra n s p o rte d .
K arlsruhe i s a ls o o f some im portance f o r waterway* s t r a f f i c as i t s f a i r l y modem harbour, connected w ith th e Rhine by the S tic h C anal, has e x ten siv e i n s t a l l a t i o n s f o r re lo a d in g c o a l.
I n d u s tr ia lly K arlsru h e i s not o f g re a t im portance. I t s main in d u stry is en g in eerin g connected w ith armaments and i t i s s itu a te d m ainly in th e E a ste rn and W estern o u ts k ir ts o f th e town.
There a re two main ta rg e t a r e a s :- ’’A” The in lan d p o rt connected w ith th e Rhine by the S tic h Canal and th e in d u s tr ia l a re a G-runwinkel, between which th e town’ s power s ta tio n i s s itu a te d . (An im portant s e c to r o f th e railw ay p a sse s through t h i s i n d u s t r i a l a r e a ) , **B**. To the E ast o f th e main railw ay s ta tio n , th e m arsh allin g y ard , la rg e railw ay workshops and th e town gas works. A djacent to th e gas works i s th e im portant ju n c tio n o f th e ra ilw a y lin e s to F ra n k fo rt on Main and S tu ttg a r t.
I n th e c e n tre o f th e b u ilt- u p a re a o f K arlsruhe,betw een Vorholz S tra sse and G arten S tra sse i s th e im portant sm all arms ammunition works of the form er Deutsche Waffen & M unitions­ fa b rik e n A.G. Because o f th e unfavourable s itu a tio n o f K arlsruhe c lo se to th e French f r o n tie r t h i s works was p a r tly clo sed down during th e e a rly sta g e s o f th e war b u t i s now b e lie v e d to be working again a t f u l l c a p a c ity employing se v e ra l thousand workers.
P u b lic U t i l i t y S erv ices S tä d tisc h e s E le k triz it& ts Werk K arlsruhe (2) The K arlsruhe m unicipal therm al power s t a tio n i s s itu a te d in th e c e n tre o f th e town. The e stim ated c a p a c ity i s 50 MW. In 1933 th e re were 2 g en eratin g s e ts o f a t o t a l cap acity o f 21 MW in s ta lle d . In 1940 Brown B overi o f Mannheim supplied one 32 MW s e t. The s ta tio n i s connected to th e R.W.E. g rid by a 100-150 kV lin e v ia th e K arlsruhe s u b -s ta tio n a t S cheibenhardt.
- 378 -
Type & description of target Public Utility Services (cont)
Location Priority rating
Sub-station , Scheibenhardt (2) This sub-station on the R.w.E. grid is situated roughly 3 miles to the South West of Karlsruhe. 100-150 kV lines connect it with the municipal power station at Karlsruhe and with Mannheim, Marbach, Forbach and Offenburg.
Gas Works Karlsruhe (3) The main municipal gas works of Karlsruhe is situated within the built- up area of the town adjacent to the rest of the railway shops. A subsidiary gas works is situated in the suburb Durlach.
Transportation
Inland Harbour Karlsruhe (2) Karlsruhe is an important trans-shipment centre for the Rhine traffic, the chief commodities being coal and timber. The inland harbour, which has five basins, is entered from the Rhine through the Stichkanal which is one mile in length.. The harbour area was severely damaged by the R.A.F. and lost much of its storage capacity and other facilities. A considerable amount of repair work has been carried out and the port is now again an important trans-shipment centre.
Railway junction Karlsruhe (2) The main line to Basle which passes through Karlsruhe is one of the chief trunk routes from Germany to Switserland and Italy. A second main line leads Eastwards from Karls­ ruhe through Pforzheim to Stuttgart and Southern Germany. Five miles from Karlsruhe a bfanch diverges from this second main line and leads North East to Bruchsal and Heidel­ berg. A further branch to the West crosses the Rhine one mile North of the Stichkanal and joins the railway following the left bank of the Rhine.
Marshalling Yards Karlsruhe (3) There are large marshalling yards adjacent to the main station on the Southern outskirts of the town.
- 379 -
Type & description of target Location Priority rating
Railway Repair Works Karls rube (2) A large railway repair shop is situated in Karlsruhe proper and is believed to employ some 2,000 workers on repair and maintenance of passenger coaches and goods wagons.
The Karlsruhe railway repair works forms one link in a chain of three works together carrying out all types of railway repair work as follows:- Offenburg = Locomotives Durlach = Tenders Karlsruhe = Passenger coaches and goods wagons *
Engineering and Armaments Deutsche Waffen Gartenstr. (2) The Karlsruhe plant is the parent works of the Deutsche Waffen und Munitions Werke * A.G. They are one of the largest German makers of S.A.A. (including tracer and incendiary bullets) and are also makers of machinery for munitions factories. The Karlsruhe works were damaged by bombing and in 1942 their activities had been considerably reduced. Later reports indicate that new shops had been erected and large electrically driven presses and electric furnaces are mentioned as being among the products. The works are in the centre of the town.
Carl Metz List Str. (3) This firm was one of the two leading German makers of fire fighting equipment, the other being Magirus of Ulm. The works Karlsruhe were partly destroyed by bombing and it is not believed that they have been restored to more than a small proportion of their pre­ war output.
Genschow & Co. Durlach and Wolfartsweier (3) The Gustav Genschow & Co. were in peace-time specialists in the manufacture of sporting ammunition’and were employing approximately 1,000 workers. The Durlach works are chiefly for the manufacture of small shot but at Wolfartsweier,a village 1 mile south of Durlach, they have a factory for the couplete manufacture of sporting ammunition and percussion caps.
Ground reports suggest that more than 2,000 workers were employed by Genschow in 1942.
- 300 -
Type & description of target Location Priority rating
Engineering and Armaments (cont) Gritzner Kayser A.G. Durlach (2) This company was an important producer of sewing machines and bicycles and is now believed to be employing some 3,000 workers and to be manufacturing small arms and components. Their works occupy a considerable area to the South of Durlach railway station.
Junker & Ruh A.G. Siemens Str. (3) This firm employed some 1,400 workers before the war on domestic gas and electric ovens and similar household apparatus. It is believed that they are fully active on the manufacture of components for the Deutsche Waffen and Munitions Werke A.G.
Nahmaschinenfabrik Karl Wilhelmstr. (3) The Nahmaschinenfabpik Karlsruhe A.G. Vorm.
Haid und Neu employed some 800 workers before the war and in addition to sewing machines manufactured refrigerators for household use.
They are now believed to be engaged on the manufacture of small arms.
•
Schaerer Werke Hansastr. (3) These works employed some 400 workers in 1939 and specialised in lathes and drilling machines.
Sebold Durlach (3) The Badische Maschinenfabrik und Eisengiesserei Vorm. G. Sebold, are makers of machinery, especially for the match industry. They also make all kinds of equipment required for iron foundries. Their works are East of the Durlach railway station and close to those of Gritzner Kayser, mentioned above. Sebold employed some 800 workers before the war.
Rubber and Tyres
Deutsche Michelin Vogesenstr. (3) The Deutsche Michelin Pneumatik A.G. belong to the French Michelin concern. The production at these works was closed down in 1936 and the 1 machinery removed to France. The premises were commandeered by the German Government and at the outbreak of war they were in use as food storage.
In one of the early raids on Karlsruhe the Michelin plant was severely damaged. The fact that it was rapidly repaired, camouflaged and even extended suggests that it is used for something more important than storage purposes but the real use to which it is being put has not yet been ascertained.
-381-
KASSEL (Hesse Nassau) 51° 20« Ne 9° 30« E: 420 miles: (216,000) Next to Frankfurt On Main Kassel is the chief town of the province of Hesse Nassau. Among the town’s industries the Henschel locomotive works and the Fieseler aircraft works are of major importance to the German war production. There are two large textile factories and a number of engineering works. Kassel is one of the main railway junctions of Central Germany. The town is built mainly on the left or Western bank of the Fulda and the Henschel works are in the Northern half of the built-tq? area. South-east of the town and East of the river is the suburb of Bettenhausen where there is another group of industries.
Transportation Railway Centre Kassel (3) The main station of Kassel is in the centre of the town ani is a terminal station. Three main lines lead from Kassel to the Ruhr, to Northern and Eastern Germany, and to Frankfort on Main respectively.
Two farther branch lines lead to the East and West.
Marshalling Yards Kassel (3) These marshalling yards, which have a capacity of < 2,300 wagons per 24 hours, are in Rothenditmold, the North-western section of the town. Adjacent | to the marshalling yards is a goods station with extensive storage facilities.
Railway Repair Shops Kassel (3) These are large repair shops which undertake the repair and maintenance of locomotives and rolling stock. They are at the Northern end of the marshalling yards.
Public Utility Services Power Station Kassel (3) The municipal power station is East of the town in the suburb of Bettenhausen. It has an installed capacity of 37 W .
Gasworks Kassel (-) In 1936 the Kassel municipal gasworks made 560 million ou. ft. of gas.
Preussag Power Station/
-382-
Preussag Pourer Station Borken (1) The thermal power station at Borken is owned by the Preussische Elektrizitäts A.G. and has an installed capacity of 168 MW. It is situated about 20 miles South-west of Kassel near the brown-coal mine from wfcich it is supplied with fuel. It is a base-load station. There is an indoor sub-station for 110 kV, 60 kV, ani lower voltages, and adjoining is a large open-air transformer and switching station which probably contains plant for 220 kV and 100 kV. The output is mainly supplied to the Hesse area and to Hanover , and off-peak supplies are given to the Bringhausen pumped-storage station of the Waldeck hydro scheme, also owned by the same company. The station is connected to the oonpany»s 220 kV grid.
Aircraft and Aero-Exines
Fieseler Bettenhausen (2) Fieseler Waldau (2) Fieseler Waldau (2) The Fieseler Flugzeugbau G.nub.H. have three separate plants in the vicinity of Kassel, of which one is imaediately South of the Bettenhausen railway station and two are at Waldau, approximately one mile South of Bettenhausen. The assembly of the \ aircraft takes place at the two Waldau plants which are situated South West and South East of the village of Waldau. The plant to the South ‘ West of Waldau is adjacent to an airfield.
The two Waldau works were reported in October 1943 to be completing the assembly of 30 W 190»S and 50 Fi 15$ (light transport air­ craft) per month. The Fieseler works are believed to have been allotted a high quota for FÜZ190 production in the 1944 progranme.
The Bettenhausen works manufacture major ccnponents for the Waldau factories. Engines are inported from the BMW works at Eisenach.
Henschel Altenbauna (2) The Henschel Flugzeugmotorenbau G.m.b.H. has been erected during the war near the village of Altenbauna six miles South West of Kassel. It is ei^aged on the production of D. 8.-type aero-engines and is believed to have an output of approximately 115 per month. Aero-engine repair work is also carried out on a fairly large scale. Several thousand workers are engaged, including a large proportion of foreigners, half of whom are women.
Henschel & Sohn/
- 383 -
Engineering and Armaments Henshel & Sohn G.m.b.H.
Henschels are the leading German locomotives works and in peacetime were capable of building 200 main-line locomotives per a n n m in addition to a large number of smaller types. Their works were continually enlarged during the first years of the war and with the adoption of standard locomotive types their capacity increased to many times the above figure.
One of the most important manufacturers of trucks in Germany before the war, this firm was also of great importance in supplying German requirements for heavy transport vehicles, which were largely used with trailers. Truck production was of relatively small importance in relation to the activities of this firm in other branches of engineering, although in connection with heavy road transport it was an important contribution to the German requirements. Their manufactures include municipal-type vehicles, such as road sweeping, washing and sprinkling machines, and refuse collecting vehicles; and also the "Finkbeiner” producer-gas unit which is one of the 12 types standardised by Germany.
It is belived that even before the war at least one section of the parent works (WerkI) was engaged on the design and construction of medium and heavy tank prototypes and it is probable that during the war certain serial production of tanks took place at the Henschel works in co-operation with Wegnann & Co. (see below).
Henschel Henschelstr. (1)
Werk I. The parent factory of Henschel is immediately North of the town centre. This factory is the main locomotive-assembly works but is also reported to be important in the production of tanks, both of the heavy and the me d i m types.
/Henschel
-384-
Henschel Rothenditmold, (1 ) Werte II,, is situated just North-west of the main railway station and was greatly extended in 1938-39, It is primarily engaged on the construction of boilers, and other major components and castings for locomotives, which are supplied to Werk I» for assembly.
Henschel Mittelfeld (1) These works which are known as Werk III, are now believed to be the largest of the three Henschel plants. They are in the North-western suburb of Mittelfeld and are less than one ml Je to the North of Werk II« They have been greatly extended since the outbreak of war, A.F.VJs and all kinds of heavy military vehicles are produced. Locomotive cylinders, chassis, gears and other engine components for supply to the main assembly plant are made at these works, which also include engine- testing workshops as well as research laboratories, apprentice-training schools, and repair shops.
Wegmann & Co, Bettenhausen (2) This firm of railway wagon builders employed 600 workers before the war. They are now working in cooperation with Henschel on the assembly of medium and heavy tanks. Reports suggest that Wegmann now enqploy more than 2,000 workers,
SdtariLdt’sdhe Heissdampf G,m,b,H, Kassel (3) This firm are makers of a variety of locomotive components but specialise in superheaters, which they supply to almost the whole of the German locomotive industry.
Gebr, Crede & Co, Aueweg (3) The Gebrüder Crede & Co, are makers of railway wagons and rolling stock. Their works are in the suburb of Niederzwehren, Some 800 workers were employed before the war.
Beck & Henkel Wolfhagerstr. (-)
।
The Maschinenbau A.G. vorn. Beak & Henkel employed seme 300 workers in 1939 and specialised in cranes, lifts, and lifting gear, A. Bitter * Co. Gun.b.H. Fiedler str. (-) This firm specialises in electrio motors. Their works are in the Northern quarter of the town.
Ammunition Factory/
-385-
Ammunition Factory Bettenhausen (-) An ammunition factory is reported to have been opened in 1941 in the suburb of Bettenhausen and to be employing 2,800 workers. The works are said to be well camouflaged and to be built partly underground.
Textiles, Rayon, gulp and Paper
Spinnfaser A.G. Wohnstr. (J) This spinning mill, which produces yarns from staple fibre, is adjacent to the Fieseler aircraft factory in Bettenhausen.
Before the war the works had been repeatedly enlarged and was considered to be the largest mill of its kind in Europe. Some 4,000 workers were employed in 1938 when the capacity of the works was 133>000 Kg. of staple fibre per day. The works capacity is believed to have increased to 150,000 Kg. per day daring the early part of the war.
JUte Spinnerei Ziereribergerstr. (-)
The Jute Spinnerei u. Weberei Kassel A. (r. are sack manufacturers and employed some 800 workers before the war. Their works are adjacent to the Henschel Werk II.
Salzmann & Oomp. SandershÄuserstr. (3)
The weaving mills of this firm are in Bettenhausen immediately North of the railway station. They are makers of sail and tentcloth, wagon covers, and uniform material, and are important suppliers to the armed forces.
-------- -0 O 0 — — -
K 8 H l/Blln. (Baden)
48° J5» N> 7° 50« Bs M 0 mile« (12,200) Kehl is a frontier town on the right bank of the river Rhine. It is connected to Strassburg (France) by rail and road bridges over the river. Industrially Kehl is of no particular importance but its state owned harbour, which has been considerably extended during the past six years, is important.
In this area the prevailing traffic is in transit goods from and to France. Kehl was built in 1896 to conpete with Strqesburg harbours. In 1938 the total turnover of traffic in Kehl was 1,995,000 tons. In the pre-war period.
Strassburg handled a greater volume of traffic than any other inland port of France. Rhine traffic at Strassburg harbour 1929-1937 increased from 4.8 million tons to 5,4 million
-586-
tons and canal traffic for the same period increased from 1.6 to 2.4 million tons*
The harbour installations of Kehl consist of three basins 3,500 su, 1,700 m. and 505 su long respectively, having an average width of 80 m» There are electric cranes, loading bridges, numerous coal dressing plants and extensive storage yards. Over half the inward traffic is from the Lo w e r Rhine and outward traffic is scarcely 5 of the inward. Commodities exported are wood, grain, potash, soda, clay, lignite and chemicals. Goods coming from France are potash, iron ore, basic slag, soda, salt, grain, bran and finished products such as shaped iron, chemicals and large quantities of coal via the Saar Canal and Rhine-Main Canal.
Transportation
Inland Port Strassburg (2)
(For details see above)
Railway Traffic centre Strassburg (J) This traffic centre consists of marshalling and goods yards serving the pert and of a junction of main lines leading across the Rhine to Prance
— 0O0-— —
KELSTERBACH,'Ifa.in (Hesse)
See under Frankf ort/Main.
— -~00O— — *
KEMPTEN (Bavaria)
47° 45* N. 10° 20» Es 435 miles; (28,000) Kempten is the chief town of the Bavarian Allgftu and is principally a market town and a centre for the important Allgäu dairy industry. There are textile Mils and an offset printing works, but apart from the chemical works mentioned below, none of the town's industries is individually of note.
Chemicals and Explosives.
Blektroschmelswerk Kenpten (3) These works, which produce silicon carbide, are reported to have been considerably expanded during the war. In 1939 they were employing some 200 workers.
«-0O0— —
KLAUSTHAL
See under CLAUSTHAL*
- 387 -
KTFL (Schleswig Holstein}
54° 20’ N. 10° 10* E; 470 miles:: (260,000) Kiel, the capital of Schleswig Holstein, is situated at the Southern end of the Kieler Forde (Hafen). This bay, about U m i l e s long and a quarter to 4 £ miles broad, is considered one of the best havens in Europe. On its Western side is the mouth of the famous Kaiser Wilhelm (or Kiel) Canal, and on the Eastern side, the mouth of the river Schwentiene.
Kiel is the principal base of the German Navy and in all respects entirely a naval town, with dockyards, victualling and fuel stores, shipbuilding, engineering and armaments works. The harbour provides anchorage for a large fleet and quick access to the North Sea through the Kiel Canal, which Joins the river Elbe at Brunsbuttelkog.
Thanks to the canal, Kiel is also safely connected by water with Hamburg, Emden and the Dutch ports. The Canal's total length from Kiel (Holtenau) to Brunsbuttelkog on the Elbe is 53 nautical miles and its depth 37,07 feet.
The double lock gates of the Canal are at its Eastern (Holtenau) end and so are the two Easternmost bridges over the Canal, the Levensau ^bridge and the Prinz Heinrich bridge. Both bridges carry roads, and the local railway line between Kiel and Flensburg passes over the Levensau bridge.
There are two principal target areas in Kiel:-
j .. ' ■■■ V ’
a) Stretching from Gaarden to Monckeberg along the Eastern side of the Kieler Hafen. In this area are the three great shipbuilding yards, the big underground oil-storage plant and ammunition stores, and, in the centre of the area, the largest Naval arsenal in Germany. Of outstanding importance is the construction of U-bpats in this area. b) Immediately at and partly to the West of the Mouth of the Kiel Canal, in the Holtenau-Wick district is a group of less important targets.
These targets consist of the Canal lock gates and bridges, the power station, oil-storage depots, and some Naval equipment works.
A third series of outlying targets includes a plant producing thin shell and air leads, as well as assembling torpedoes, and other plants manufacturing torpedo components, aeronautical instruments, signalling apparatus, and light-metal products.
Fifteen miles Northwest of Kiel at Eckenförde there is believed to be a new and important torpedo factory.
T ransportation
Lock gates of Kiel Canal Holtenau (3) These lock gates at the entrance of the Canal, in the Holtenau area, are 1,082 feet long, 147 feet wide and 49,9 feet high. (Lock gates of the same dimensions are also at the other end of the Canal, at Brunsbuttelkog in the Elbe).
Road and rail bridge over Kiel-Suohsdorf (5) Kiel Canal
There are two bridges over the Eastern end of the Canal; only one of these, the Levensau bridge, carries both road and rail.
Public/
- J88 -
Public Utilities
Städtisches Elektrizitätswerk Wik (2) Owned by the "Städtische Licht u. Wasserwerke, Kiel, but operated by the "Vereinigte Grosskraftwerke Schleswig - Holstein G.m.b.H."
Rendsburg, an operating company owned by the corporations of Kiel, Flensburg and Neumunster, the Kiel municipal thermal power station is situated on the Southern bank of the Kaiser Wilhelm canal in the Northern suburb of Kiel, The station has an installed capacity of 56 MW,
There are two 60 kV lines connecting it to Rendsburg and Neumünster respectively, and several 6 kV and lower voltage lines connecting it, it is believed, the small 6 MW power station on the Humboldtatrane, to 2 other small tydro stations, and to the power stations of the "Germania" and "Deutsche Werft" ship­ building yards. These two latter power stations are under contract to supply electricity to the city network.
Adjoining this power station is a small substation with 3 or 4 6/6O kV transformers.
Städtische Gaswerke Vik (2) The Kiel municipal gasworks are adjacent to the power station on the Southern bank of the Kaiser Wilhelm canal. In 19}6, this works made 1,150 million cubic feet of gas.
Liquid Fuels and Substitutes Commercial Storage Wik (-) This oil storage despot is operated by a number of firms. Its capacity is 65,000 tons, and it is located on the Southern shore of the Canal just West of the lock gates. It is not known to what extent the storage capacity is being utilized.
Underground Storage/
- 389 -
Underground. Storage Monkeberg (-) I t i s estimated that the'storage capacity of th is depot i s in the neighbourhood of 180,000 tons* There are a to ta l of 24 tanks , and space w ithin the s it e for a further 50 tanks*
Underground Storage Vossbrook (near(-) Seeflug Hafen)
The capacity of th is underground depot i s not known but satisfactory ground in tellig e n c e ind icates that naval fu e l ani motor sp ir it were in storage in large quantities in 1942«
Underground Naval Fuel Dumps Flembruder (-) see (11 Km* West of K iel.
Constructed ini 938 th is Naval fu el depot con sists of 25 subterranean fu el tanks, each with a capacity of 10,000 cbm* The dump is located on the Western bank of the Flembruder See, 11 m* West of K iel and about h alf a kilometre South of the K iel Canal*
Submarine Refuelling Base Act erwehr- (3) Flemhude (West of Kiel)
Between Achterwehr and Flemhude (Quarribeck) ani the K iel canal i s a side-branch of the la tte r which, having become shallow, has now been dug out and transformed into an inportant fu ellin g sta tio n for submarines* The station comprises a large punping station , a power p lan t, a small refinery with numerous sheds, workshops, etc* , and a considerable number of large and small tanks spread over the area of several , kilom etres, partly underground and camouflaged*
Shipbuilding/
- 390 -
Shipbuilding
Deutsche Werke Kiel, A.G. Kiel (1) (formerly "Kaiserliche Werft") (East side of harbour)
This state-owned concern has two works, one on the Eastern side of the harbour and the other on the Western side, in Friedrichsort. The former of the two is known as "Werke Kiel” and is mainly engaged in building ships of every class and size end carrying out repairs on a large scale» War­ ships, including submarines, are constructed; and, since the last war, output has included the battle­ ship "Gneisenau", the pocket battleship "Deutschland", the cruisers "Nürnberg", "Karlsruhe", and "Blücher", and the aircraft-carrier "Graf Zeppelin". The -works cover an area of 750,000 sq. metres with 4,700 metres quay frontage. (This firm is also mentioned under Engineering and Armaments.)
Fried. Krupp Germaniawerft A.G. Gaarden (1) These large shipbuilding yards are owned by Fried. Krupp A.G, of Essen. ^hey are engaged on the construction of warships of all types, including submarines and also build merchantmen and coastal vessels. The yards which consist of 4 floating docks, 1 dry dock and 8 slips as well as 4 cornered slips are also well equipped to undertake all types of repair works to merchant and naval vessels.
Kriegsmarine Werft (formerly Howaldtswerke) Kiel (North of (1) mouth of Schwentiene) The shares of the Howaldtswerke were acquired by the Deutsche Werke in Kiel, A.G., in 1937, and Howaldtswerke consequently came under the control of the Reichsmarine) and was renamed Kriegsmarine­ werft. The works comprise engineering plants, boiler works, foundries, and shipyards. The ship­ yards have 9 floating docks (three are coveted, and one is a pressure dock for the testing of U-boat hulls) and U-boat shelters. There are six slipways (one 340» x 65», two 450* x 65’, and three 470’ x 65*)
These yards have, since 1940, concentrated on building and repairing U-boats. The output of new U-boats during the period 29.6.40 to 31.7.43, is given as 32 x 500-ton boats plus another 5 seen building, making a total of 37.
Naval Arsenal Wellingdorf (1) This is the largest naval arsenal in Germany. It is situated at Wellingdorf between the Kriegsmarine Werft and the Deutsche Werke. The arsenal has been repeatedly extended in the course of the war and it is believed that the assembly of torpedoes is carried out here on a considerable scale.
/Aircraft
- 391 -
Aircraft and Aero Engines
Kieler Leichtbau Uhlenkrog (3) The Kieler Leichtbau G-.nub.H. is believed to be engaged on the manufacture of aircraft components and other light metal products.
They are reported to be making components for the He. 111, including tail units, and to undertake repairs. The works are in Has see, a suburb of Kiel lying South West of the city.
Flugzeugbau Kiel Neumühlen (3) The Flugzeugbau Kiel G.m.b,H. are reported to be making aircraft floats and components.
The plant is in Neumühlen, a suburb to, the East y>f Kiel, on the Eastern side of the Kiel Fjord.
Engineering and Armaments
Deutsche Werke Kiel, A»G* Friedrichsort (2) These works known as "Werk Friearichsort" are complementary to the shipbuilding works ("Werk Kiel") mentioned above under "Ship­ building". The plant consists of engineering works and a foundry, which specialise in serial construction of auxilliary machinery for ships and of ships* pumps, as well as the manufacture of Diesel locomotives and high-speed Diesel engines. These works also manufacture aircraft catapults, ships* boilers and pumps, marine and stationary Diesel engines, gears etc. The works are well equipped with modern machinery and engine test-beds. It is believed that since 1939 at least one large department has been converted to make torpedo components and to assemble complete torpedoes.
Fried. Krupp Gaarden (2) Fried. Krupp Germania Werft are makers of torpedoes, submarine components, ships* boilers, pumps and other naval equipment.
They also make steam turbines and signalling apparatus on a fairly large scale.
Elektroakustic Weddigenring (2) The Elektroakustic G,m.b.H. are important makers of hydrophones, listening apparatus, underwater signalling equipment and searchlights. The works were built in 1938 and went into full production early in 1942. A large section is devoted entirely to the manufacture and assembly of listening apparatus for detecting the approach of aircraft. Another section of the works produces searchlights and the larger searchlight components.
All kinds of acoustical instruments and components are manufactured and the works includes an important experimental station. In 1942 at least 3,000
- 392 -
Elektroakustic (contd.) workers were employed and it is believed that this number and the productive capacity of the works has since been largely increased.
Hagenuk
Habsburger Ring (2)
The Hanseatische Apparatebau Ges. Neufeld & Kuhnke (Hagenuk) were purchased in 1936 by the Th. Goldschnidt concern of Essen. They are makers of electrical signalling apparatus, marine telegraphs, temperature controllers and voltage regulators for submarines, diving suits, and respirators. Other products of these works include bomb components such as fuzes and delayed-action mechanisms, torpedo components, and detonators for mines. 5 Thomsen & Schwarzkopf Prozensdorferstr. (3) The products of this firm include torpedo motors and components and mechanisms for magnetic and other mines.
Anschutz & Co. Neumuhlen- Heikendorferweg (3)
This firm specialises in sextants and navigational instruments and compasses, including gyroscopic compasses.
Torpedo Factory Eckemfbrde Bucht (2)
One mile South South East of the town of Eckenforde, which lies at the inner end of the Baltic Fjord of that name 15 miles to the Northwest of Kiel, there is a new torpedo factory which is now reported to be one of the largest in Germany. The factory Buildings, which are on the water front, occupy an area of more than one square kilometre.
food Stuffs Meierei Verbände Canal docks (-)
The Schleswig Holsteinische Meierei- Verbande food-storage plant has a storage capacity of 12,000 tons. It is situated on the canal docks to the West of the Prinz Heinrich bridge.
-393-
K L E V E (Rhineland) 51° 45* N. 6° 10* B 270 miles: (25,000) Kleve is close to the Dutch border on the main lin e West of the Rhine from Holland to Western Germany. I t i s a Junction for two branch lin e s , one of which crosses the Rhine at Spyfc to the North of Kleve. Food Stuffs are the chief industry and Kleve is a centre for the dairy industry of th e Lower Rhineland.
Transportat ion Railway Repair Shops Kleve (3) These are medium-sized rep air shops undertaking the repair of goods wagons. •
Food Stuffs Van den Bergh Kleve (3) These works, which formerly belonged to the th ilev er concern, include a large margarine factory and vegetable-oil crushing and refining p la n t.
Bensdorp G.m.b.H. Kleve , (-) This i s a chocolate and cocoa factory adjacent to the margarine works mentioned above.
KN A P S A 0 K (Rhineland) . (See tnder Köln) K O B L E N Z (Rhineland) 50 20* N. 7 35’ E: 350 miles: (86,000) Koblenz is on the main railway lin e along the le f t bank of the Rhine and i s a junction fo r the lin e 3a ading up the Mosel valley. The town i s b u ilt at the point where the Mosel flows into the Rhine. Koblenz is a centre for the Rinne wine trade and has few other in d u stries. I t is mainly inportant as a tr a f f ic centre. .
Transportation Inland Harbour Koblenz (3) Koblenz is an important loading statio n fo r the barge tra ffic on the Rhine and Mosel; The quays are mainly along the rig h t bank of the Mosel near to i t s junction with the Rhine and there is a small dock on the opposite bank in the suburb of L ützel.
Railway Junction Koblenz (3) The main line along the le f t bank of the Rhine crosses the Mosel immediately before entering Koblenz.
From the main railway statio n in the centre of the town an inportant branch leads up the valley of the Mosel (which i t crosses West of the town by a second bridge) to T rie r, Luxemburg and France. A second branch diverges at the main statio n and crosses the Rhine to link with the trunk lin e of the right bank.
-394-
LCLtzel m arshalling yard. Koblenz (3) To the North, across the Mosel, the Lhtzel marshalling yard has a capacity of 2., 000 wagons per 24 hours.
M arshalling yarn. Oberlahnstein Situated approximately 5 miles south of Koblenz on the rig h t bank of the Rhine, where the running Bast to Limburg and Wetzlar leaves the main North- South lin e to Wiesbaden and Frankfort, th is yard has a capacity o f 2,000 wagons per 24 hours.
M arshalling Yards. Koblenz (j) West of the main railway sta tio n is the main m arshalling yards capable of handling 2,600 wagons per 24 hours. A medium sized railway rep a ir shop is adjacent to th e marshalling yards and, in addition to a goods statio n , there are sidings leading to the coal yards and gas works and to the loading quays along the rig h t bank of the Mosel.
Public U tility Services Gasworks Koblenz ( 3 ) In 1936 the Koblenz gasworks made 180 m illi cu. f t . of gas and bought a fu rth er 170 m ill. cu. f t . from the Concordiahlltte Bendorf i. Engers„a. Rhein.
-----------0O 0-----------
K O H L F U R T (Saxopy) 51° 18’ N. 15° 12» E: 660 miles (2,800) Kohlfurt is an important railway Junction 16 miles North-east of G brlitz. The main lin e from Liegnitz and the east divides into three, to the West to Cottbus, to the North west to Falkenberg and B erlin, and to the North to Frankfort/°der.
Kohlfurt is on the S ile sia n group of e le c trifie d lin e s.
Transportation
M arshalling Yard Kohlfurt (j) The marshalling yard has a capacity fo r handling 2200 wagons per 24 hours.
KOHLSGHEID (Rhineland) ° e under Eschweiler.
K 0 L B E R G (Pomerania) 54° 10» N. 15° 35* E: 680 miles; (37,000) Kolberg is the only town of ary size on that stretch of the B altic coast which lie s between S te ttin and Danzig. In peace time i t is a well-known coastal health reso rt and a large part of i t s a c tiv itie s have been h ith erto concerned with the to u rist tr a f f ic . The town is a t the mouth of a riv e r (the Persante) and there are good
-395-
gpod. small-scale ’harbour facilities# In peace time, the port had a turnover of some 150,000 tons annually, the principal trade being in grain and timber. Kolberg has good, rail connections# A direct line leads inland to Belgard on the main Stettin-Danzig route and Kolberg itself is on the railway which follows the coast from KBslin to Cammin# It is the most conveniently situated existing centre for activities on this part of the Baltic coast line# Apart from the small chemical works mentioned below there were no peace-time industries worth noting.
Transportation
Railway Repair Shops Kolberg (j) These a» medium sized shops undertaking the repair of goods wagons.
Chemicals and Explosives
Exterikultur A.G-. Kolberg (-) This firm specialised in peace time in ointments and cosmetics and employed some JOO workers.
-396-
KOIN AM RHEIN (Cologne) - Rhineland 50° 55* N. 6° 55’ E: 310 miles: (912,000) Cologne is the centre of trade, traffic, and political activity in the Rhine Province. Although it possesses important industrial establishments, its chief significance lies in its situation at the crossing of a number of trade routes.
It is the main railway-centre in the Rhineland, and a very important inland port.
The geographical position of Cologne has been the chief factor in determining the nature of its industry. Its proximity to the Ruhr coalfields and its rail, road, and river transport facilities have caused the growth of firms specialis­ ing in light and heavy engineering, chemicals, building, and textiles; in. peace-time Cologne was also noted for its luxury products, including chocolate and perfumery.
Since 1939 there has been an expansion of certain engineer­ ing works and other factories engaged on war production. These are concentrated mainly in Ehrenfeld, Kalk, and Mülheim to the East of the city on. the right bank of the Rhine. Other industrial districts with a fair number of important war factories are Sülz, Bayenthal, Poll, Deutz, Nippes, Riehl, and Niehl. Further important industrial concerns are to be found in the outlying districts of Heumar, Porz, Rondorf, Hürth, Kalscheuren, Knapsack-Goldenberg, Berrenrath, and Brauweiler.
The built-up area of Cologne itself is of no importance from a purely industrial point of view, as it is composed mainly of residential areas with the appropriate shops, offices, and wholesale houses.
The population figure of 912,000 includes the outlying townships mentioned above.
Transportation
1. Köln Hauptbahnhof Dcmplatz-S.E. side 2. West Bahnhof Venloer Wall (3) 3. Süd Bahnhof Luxemburgerstr.
The above three stations deal only with passenger traffic.
Eifeltor, Rangier Bahnhof South of the City (2)
In 1939 these marshalling yards had a capacity of 6,000 wagons per 24 hours.
Kalk-Nord Marshalling Yard Kalk-Nord (3)
lying East of the city, this marshalling yard had a capacity of 4,500 wagons per 24 hours in 1939.
-397-
KÖLN M RHEIN (Cologne) (contd.)
Gäter-Bahnhof Nippes ’ Nippes (3)
In 1939 the marshalling yards at Nippes had a capacity to deal with 3>500 wagons per 2k hours. They are adjacent to the Nippes goods yards.
Gereon Bahnhof Gereon (3)
lying North of the city and south of Nippes station, the main goods station and marshalling yards at Gereon had a capacity of 2,000 wagons per 2k hours.
Goods stations and Deutz & Gremberg (3) Marshal 1 ing Yards Bonner Wall & Luxemburgers t r.
There is a large goods station at Deutz known as the Gäter-Bahnhof Deutzerfeld, and South-east of the city lie the Gremberg marshalling yards; Other goods stations in the Köln area are at Bonner Wall and Luxemburgerstrasse.
Reichsbahnausbesserungswerke Nippes (2)
I
’
•
This repair depot is reported to employ approximately 3>400 workers on the repair and maintenance of locomotives and goods wagons.
Rheinau Hafen Right bank of (3)
the Rhine
This is the customs and commercial harbour possessing 27 warehouses and sheds, with about 115,000 square metres of covered storage, 56 hydraulic and electric cranes capable of lifting up to 5 tons in 1939.
Mülheimer Hafen Left bank of (3)
the Rhine
This industrial harbour comprised 5 warehouses covering about 23>000 square metres of storage area before the war.
Niehler Hafen Niehl (3)
This is a large industrial harbour with extensions, and one warehouse, covering 16,000 square metres of storage area.
Deutzer Industrie-Hafen Left bank of (3)
the Rhine
This is a transit harbour and handling port with modern facilities and large storage capacity.
-398-
KÖLN AM RHEIN (Cologne) (contd.)
Public Utility Services
Kraftwerk Knapsack-Goldenberg Httrth (1+) (5 miles South- West of Köln)
The complex covers an area of about one- third of a square mile and is the largest concentration of thermal generating plant in Germany, having a total capacity of 820 MW. Brown coal is obtained from the
This complex, owned by R.W.E•, consists of six generating stations. four briquette works, and a chemical works.
The generating plant comprises the:- Goldenberg power-station 530 MW capacity Knapsack I " " 70 MW H Knapsack II " " 50 MW It Knapsack III " " 75 MW tt Knapsack IV " " 75 MW It Knapsack V " " 20 MW It
neighbouring mines "Vereinigte Ville" and Berrenrath. Adjacent to the mines is a carbide plant which in 1936 had a capacity of 50,000 tons per annum.
R.W.E. Transformer Station Brauweiler Covering an area of about 100 acres, this is the largest installation of its kind in Europe, and probably the largest sub-station in the world. There are 3 bus-bar systems for 220 kV and 5 for 110 kV. The main switching control of* the turbo-generator sets at. the Goldenberg generating station is carried out here, and the buildings contain a special generator set for line-testing as well as what was, before the war, the main control- room of the R.W.E. There are 4 interbus transformers for 220/110 kV, one of which has a capacity of 80 MW., while the other three have individual, capacities of 48 MW.
The plant also includes smaller trans­ formers for local supply. The station is connected to Koblenz by a double circuit 380/220 kV line, and to Knapsack, Herdecke, Wesel, and possibly Fortuna by 220 kV lines. 110 kV lines run to Knapsack, Osterrath, Wesel, Funlingen, Kuppersteg, Er ftw erk and probably to Fortuna. The station therefore controls upwards of 1J million kVf, a high proportion of the power consumption of the Ruhr. Information received states that connection has been established with the Liege-Bressoux power-station and thereby with the Belgian Grid.
-399»
KÖLN ML RHEIN (Cologne) (contd.)
Electricity Power Station Köln (j)
This thermal plant has an installed capacity of 23 MW. It also obtains current from the R.W.E. Fortuna station, and supplies Cologne.
St&dtische Gaswerke Ehrenfeld (3)
This is the main municipal gas-works which purchases from the Alsdorf section of the Thyssen Grid and from the Ruhrgas A.G. In 1936 sales were 2,400 million cubic feet of gas. Within the Cologne area there are several other small distributing works, including such as those at Nippes, -Kalk and Mfllheim.
Rhein. Energie A.G. Deutz (j)
This gasworks purchases from Cologne and in 1936 sold 130 million cubic feet of gas.
Liquid Fiels
Kölner Benzin i^affinerie Braunsfeld (-)
In 1938 this oil refinery had a capacity of 4,000 tons per annum.
Fritz Wihl (Mineralölwerke Braunsfeld (-) vorm. M.Loeb)
The refinery and lubricating-oil plant owned by this firm had a capacity of 6,000 tons per annum in 1938.
Rhenania-Ossag Mineralölwerke A.G.
This firm operates two plants in the Cologne area.
1. The Klettenberg plant consists 1) Klettenberg (3) of a number of storage tanks but is believed to be inactive.
2. This plant is estimated to 2) Monheim (3) produce approximately 115,000 tons of petrol fron crude oil per year. The plant has facilities for the manufacture of low grade lubricants for which its capacity is estimated to be 20,000 tons per annum.
Deutzer Oelgesellschaft Deutz (-)
The firm operates a «nail oil refinejy at Deutz. Nothing is known regarding its present activity.
-400-
KÖLN ML BHSIN (Cologne) (contd.) Iron and Steel and Ferro-Alloys Walzwerk A.G. vorn.
E.Booking & Co.
Mülheim (j)
Employing about 500 workers, the plant includes steelworks and rollin g -m ills.
There are two e le c tric s te e l furnaces and two open-hearth furnaces. Steel castings, shapes, and wire e tc ., are produced on a small scale.
Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication
Vereinigte Deutsche Metallwerke A.G.
Ehrenfeld
This plant makes a v ariety of zinc products, such as etching p la te s, zinc wire, e tc ., also lead products including ro lle d lead, pipes, wire, and other manufactures.
Lindgens & Söhne Mülheim In 1938 about 200 workers were employed on the production of w hite-lead, lead and zinc dyes, lead s a lts , e tc .
V ereinigte B lei- u. Zinnwerke Köln G.m.b.H. (V.B.Z. ) The Cologne branch of th is firm manufactures ro lle d lead, pipes, wire, and other lead manufactures.
Shipbuilding F ritz Bausch Ewald Beminghaus
Deutz
(3)
( - )
( - )
(-)
These shipyards are believed to be engaged on the re p a ir of riv e r barges only.
-4 0 1 -
KÖLN AM RHEIN (Cologne) (contd.)
Engineering and Armaments
Felten & Guilleaume Mülheim (1) Carlswerk A.G-.
This is the second largest cable works in Germany, occupying a total area of 300,000 square metres. All types of electric cables, copper, brass, bronze, * aluminium and iron wire, steel hawsers, special armament components, and galvanised sheets are produced, and the plant includes a copper refinery with a capacity of 8,000 tons per annum, as well . as a copper-rolling mill. The plant also manufactures wire-drawing machinery, and raw and semi-finished materials for wire making. The firm also makes equipment for wire works and mining installations.
In 1938 the estimated cable output in tons per annum was 30,000 and the capacity for copper wire products is now believed to be 25,000 tons. It is estimated that some 10,000 workers are employed.
Klöckner Humboldt-Deutz A.G. 1) Deutz- (2) Mülheimerstr. 2) Kalk- (1) Dillenburge rat r.
This firm has two factories at Cologne both engaged on the building of internal- combustion engines, including submarine engines, lorries (Magirus type), trucks, tractors, and fuel-injection pumps.
The Kalk works also manufactures cranes, loading bridges, belt conveyors, excavators, and rope-haulage plant. The Deutz factory is believed to employ 5/6,000 and the Kalk factory 10/12,000 workers.
Ford Motor Co. A.G. Niehl (1) This works has been extended since the war and is engaged not only on the product­ ion of motor vehicles and road tractors mainly for military purposes, but also on the manufacture of Ford engines for landing craft etc. and stationary power plants.
Lorry production is estimated at 35,000 per annum, and the number of workers at 8/9,000.
-402-
KÖLN M RHEIN (Cologne) (contd.)
Hermann Kolb ' Ehrenfeld (3)
Drilling machines are manufactured by this firm, which employed some 500 workers in 1939.
J.Pohlig A.G. Zollstock (3)
Some 500 workers are believed to be employed here on the production of overhead railway conveyors, blast furnaces, and other steel plant equip­ ment, - e.g. complete charging apparatus etc. Heavy goods hoists, lifts, lattice transporters, and coal-cleaning equip­ ment are also manufactured.
Imbert Generatoren Braunsfeld (3)
The Braunsfeld factory of this firm is believed to employ 800 workers and bianufactures portable gas-producers for wood and mineral fuels.
Feldmdhle Papier- u. Zellstoffwerke A.G. Ldlßdorf-Porz (3)
Known as Werk Koholyt-Ldlsdorf and covering an area of 743,248 square metres, this works is believed to be an important manufacturer of silicon­ carbide and oxide abrasives. It is also stated to be producing electro­ lytic alkali and to have produced in 1936 4,800 tons of caustic soda, 6,600 tons of chlorine, and 3,000 tons of bleaching powder. Power is obtained fron the R.W.E. grid through the works* own switching and transformer station.
In 1939 some 450 workers were employed.
Heimat-Kraftfahrpark Ehrenfeld (3)
It has been reported that 400 workers are engaged here on the repair of military transport.
Gottfried Hagen A.G. Kalk (1)
This firm is the second-largest German manufacturer of accumulators and batteries (including submarine accumulators and battery containers). It also makes rubber goods, production of which is undertaken in two nearby works; and lead manufactures such as rolled lead, pipes, wire etc.
One of the two rubber plants is employed on the production of rubber thread and the other on the production of varied articles, such as accumulator covers etc. In 1937 the company employed 2,000 workers.
-403-
KÖLN AM RHEIN (Cologne) (contd.)
Vereinigte Westdeutsche Deutz (3) Waggonfabrik A.G.
Prior to the war some 2,200 workers were employed here on the manufacture of railway wagons, rail cars, tank wagons, etc.
Vereinigte Deutsche Metallwerke A.G. Ehrenfeld (3) (vorm. Rheinische Sprengkapsel u. Zündhdtchenfabrik)
This firm manufactures detonators, shell-fhzes, etc., and about 500 workers are employed.
Bamag Meguin A.G. Bayenthal (3)
This film manufactures steel-works plant e.g. blast-furnace accessories, pig-breakers, pig-casting machines, steel furnaces and equipment, chemical plant, gears, and electrical equipment, and building machinery, and prior to the war employed 1,500 workers.
Citroenwerk Poll Poll (3)
1,000 workers are reported to be employed here on the repair and maintenance of military transport.
Meitowsky & Co. A.G. Porz (3)
This company belongs to the Felten & Guilleaume concern. It is an important manufacturer of insulators for high-and low-tension cables, condensers, switches, and insulated electrical apparatus.
Some 1,000 workers were employed before the war.
Alfred H. Schütte Deutz (3)
This firm manufactures automatic machines, lathes, tools, grinding machines, and other machine tools.
It is believed to employ about 700 workers.
Gebrüder Stollwerk A.G. Rheinau-Hafen (3)
This works includes a large engineering department which is now believed to be engaged solely on the manufacture of small arms components, minor aircraft components, etc. 600/800 workers are believed to be employed.
-4C4-
KOLN AM RHEIN (Cologne) (contd.)
Rheinische Walzmaschinenfabrik Ehrenfeld (1 G. m.b.H.
This film manufactures cold-rolling mills and mills for rolling light­ alloys.
Land- und Seekabelwerke A.G. ’ Nippes (jj This firm manufactures all types of electrical cable and wire, as well as accessories and rubber goods. The estimated output was 2,500 tons per annum in 1938.
Rheinische Draht- u. Kabelwerke Riehl (3) Owned by Brown, Boveri & Co., Mannheim, this plant is engaged on the manufacture of cables and wires, including telephone cables. The estimated output in 1938 was 2,000 tons per annum.
Elektromotorenwelke Do m h o f f & Co. Horrem (-) This firm manufactures both A.G. and D.C. motors,, from fractional horse-power up to about 100 h.p. together with pole­ charging motors and convertors.
Kerpen & Co. G.m.b.H. Köln (-) This is a small factory manufacturing insulated cable and wire.
Elektro-Isolier Industrie Wahn- Porz-Wahn (-) Wilhelm Ruppert
This company specialises in the production of insulated wire and insulating materials.
Chemicals and Explosives
A.G. fdr Sticks toffdflnger Knapsack (2) This factory, which is operated by the I.G. combine and which lies about 7 km.
South-west of Köln, was one of the chief producers of carbide prior to the war. ‘ Cyanamide is manufactured by the Polzenius process, and other products include calcium cyanide, nitrates, ferro-silicon, and acetic acid. In 1938 the production of calcium carbide amounted to 250,000 tons, 60,000 tons more than in 1937. In 1938/39 also, the plant’s capacity for cyanamide was estimated at J8,OOO metric tons of nitrogen, although actual production in 1938 only amounted to the equivalent of 23,000 metric tons of nitrogen. 2,000 workers are believed to be employed and the plant has its own power-station known as Knapsack I with an installed capacity of 70 MW. (See also under Public Utility Services)
-4-05-
KÖLN RHEIN (Cologne) (contd.)
Chemische Fabrik Kalk G.m.b.H. Kalk (3) Sulphuric, hydrochloric, and nitric acids, nitrates of ammonia, potash and soda, potash salts and compounds, soda ash, caustic soda, and fertilisers are produced here. The works is believed to employ more than 1,250 workers and produces 1$ Germany’s total nitrate output. In 1928 the plant had the capacity to produce 10/20,000 tons of 100% sulphuric acid.
Siegel & Co., G.m.b.H. (Sidolwerke) Braunsfeld (-) Prior to the war about 1,150 workers were employed here on the production of me tai-cleaning chemical preparations.
August Wegelin A. G. Kalscheuren (-) Prior to the war some three hundred workers were employed by this firm on the manufacture of tar-products and carbon black.
Herbig Haarhaus A.G. Bickendorf (-) This firm manufactures dyes, paints, and varnishes. In 1936 it employed some 500 workers and they are now reported to number only 300.
Westendorp & Wehner A.G. Köln (-) This firm manufactures plates, films, and paper for the photographic industry.
Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper Glanzstoff Courtaulds Niehl (3) Prior to the war some 800 workers were employed here on the manufacture of viscose rayon and staple fibre.
The daily output was 20,500 Kg. of rayon and 18,000 Kg. of staple fibre.
Felten & Guilleaume A.G. Köln (-) This factory of the firm manufactures rope and string, and in 1938 employed 300 workers.
-406-
KOLN AM RHEIN (Cologne) (contd.)
Rubber and Tyres
Radium Gummiwerke m.b.H. Dellbrack (3’ Prior to the war this firm employed about 1,000 workers and was manufactur­ ing proofing, medical goods, and anti­ gas clothing. It is thought probable that, in wartime, this film is also producing fuel tanks. “RMium" is a well-known German trade mark.
Rheinische Gummiwarenfabrik A.G. Nippes Franz Clouth '
This firm manufactures cycle tyres and tubes and a fairly considerable range of soft rubber goods. 500 workers were employed in 1938. The company is controlled by Felten & Guilleaume Carlswerk.
Kölnische GummifÄdenfabrik Deutz (3) Bicycle tyres, rubberised cloth, and rubber goods form the production of this factory which was formerly owned by Ferd. Köhlstädt and Co. In 1939 some 450 workers were employed.
Carl Plaat Nippes (-) Rubber goods such as suction tubes and sanitary articles were produced by this firm before the war, and it then employed about 440 workers.
Atlantic Gummiwerk Braunsfeld (-) (Alois Weyers)
Prior to the war some j60 workers were employed on the production of technical rubber goods.
Karl Richelshagen-) Köln Richard Gerling )
These firms are both Government-licenced re-treading concerns. Karl Richelshagen has a capacity to process 800 tyres per month, and Richard Gerling a capacity to process 650 tyres per month.
Peter Rost Gummiwaren- u. Packungsfabrik Köln
Joseph Bienefeld Of small individual importance these firms are both engaged on the manufacture of rubber goods. Normally, Peter Rost employ­ ed 400 workers on the manufacture of motor­ cycle tyres and mechanicals. Joseph Bienefeld produces rubber goods for medical and technical purposes, as well as rubber soling.*
(3)
-407-
R6LN -AM RHEIN (Cologne) (contd.) Foodstuffs
Auer Mühlenwerke A.G. Deutz (-) This is a flour and grain storage mill with a milling capacity in 1938 of 5,000 tons per day, and a storage capacity of 280,000 tons* Leysieffer & Lietzmam Deut zer-Indus trie- (-) Hafen
In 1939 this flour and grain-storage mill had a milling capacity of 2,000 tons per day and a storage capacity of 150,000 tons.
Hefftsche Kunstmühle A.G. Agrippina Werft (-) Mülheim
This is a grain-milling and storage plant with a pre-war milling capacity of 500 tons per day and a storage capacity of 40,000 tons.
Gebrüder Stollwerk Rheinau-Hafen (-) In 1938 about 500 workers were employed on the production of food concentrates and chocolate preparations.
—— ——o0 o—-- —
-408-
KONIGSBERG (East Prussia) 54° 40’ N. 20° JO* E: 870 miles: (j70,000)
Königsberg is the chief town of East Prussia and an important traffic centre and base for the German lines of communication to the Eastern front. The city is built on either bank of the river Pregel, which flows from East to West into the Frisches ^aff and thence into the Baltic. South of the river are the main railway station, goods and marshalling yards, and the docks and port area. North of the river is the main part of the city area and the Nordbahnhof passenger and goods stations. The Schichau ship-building concern of Danzig have large yards on the Pregel and these constitute the most important present-day industry in Königsberg. There are, however, several other factories connected with armament production, many of which are grouped on both sides of the Pregel in the South Western quarter of the town.
Königsberg is an important flour-milling centre and grain-shipment port and has large storage facilities.
Transportat ion
Port Area Königsberg (j) The docks, which consist mainly of three open docks or harbours, are on the South bank of the Pregel in the South-west coiner of the town. The Indust riehafen is approximately 1,600 yards long by 200 yards wide. The Holzhafen to the West is equal in area to the Industriehafen.
The Freihafen to the East is the smallest of the three docks. The quays are well served with railway sidings and there are extensive storage sheds, grain silos, and oil tanks.
Railway Junction Königsberg (j).
Königsberg is on a main line leading from Danzig through Elbing and Königsberg to Insterburg where it connects with the direct railway route from Northern Germany to Lithuania and the Northern sectors of • the Eastern front. Four brapch lines lead from Königsberg to Pillau and Northwards to various small settlements on the Baltic coast. A farther branch leads Southwards into the agricultural districts of East Prussia.
Goods Station Königsberg (j) A large goods station is situated on the South bank of the river Pregel immediately North of the main railway station.
Goods Station Palve (j) A second goods station is in the Northern part of the town close to the railway station known as the Nordbahnhof.
-409-
KÖNIGSBERG (contd.)
Marshalling Yards Königsberg (3)
There are large marshalling yards South of the river Pre gel and close to the main railway station. These yards can handle 2,000 wagons per 24 hours.
Numerous branches and sidings lead from these yards to the port area which lies one mile to the West.
Railway Repair Shops Königsberg (3)
These large shops are believed to employ some 1,500 workers and to undertake the repair of locomotives and rolling stock.
They are situated immediately South-east of the marshalling yards.
Public Utility Services
Power Station Königsberg (3)
The electric power station of the Ostpreussenwerk A.G. is on the North side of the river Pregel near to the HollKnderbaum railway station. It has an installed capacity of j6 MW.
Gas Works Königsberg (-)
The municipal gasworks are situated within the built-up area of the town.
In 1936 they made 1,800 million cu. ft. of gas.
Liquid Fuels
Petrol Storage Rathshof (-) Three large storage tanks belonging to the Rhenania Ossag, with a total capacity of 8,000 tons, are on the North side of the Pregel opposite the dock area and * East of the Rathshof railway station. It is not known to what extent, if at all, these storage facilities are now ut-il ized.
Petrol Storage Industriehafen (-) Two large and six small tanks belonging to the Rhenania Ossag, with a total capacity of 3,000 tons, are inside the dock area between the Industriehafen and the Holzhafen.
-410«
KÖNIGSBERG (contd.)- Aircraft and Aero-Engines
Repair Works Devau (5)
The Königsberg airfield is on the East side of the town in the suburb of Devau.
The workshops of the Deutsche Luft-Hansa A.G. which are adjacent to the airfield, are equipped to carry out aircraft repairs.
Ship Building
Schichau G.m.b.H. Königsberg (2)
The Schichau yards are on the South bank of the Pre gel, half a mile down­ stream from the Holzhafen. Naval auxiliaries, mine-layers, small torpedo boats, and M.T.B’s are built. There are two main slipways and a third smaller slipway where M.T.B.*8 can be constructed.
The yards have two floating docks where, in June 1943, seven submarines were under­ going repairs. «A third floating* dock is used for general ship repairs.
In addition to shipbuilding the Schichau works produce torpedoes. A.A. shells (probably for naval use), and other ammunition. They also construct bridge parts, steel pontoöns, and ships* equipment.
Several thousand workers are employed, including a large proportion of foreign labour.
Otto Kuczewski Nettelbeckstr. (3)
To the East of Königsberg the river Pregel flows in two channels. On the South bank of one of these, the Alte Pregel, in the South-eastern quarter of the town, are the shipbuilding yards of Otto Kuczewski, where small steamers are built and repaired and boilers and ships engines constructed.
Engineering and Armaments
Steinfurt Holsteinerdamm (3)
The Waggonfabrik Steinfurt A.G. have their works on the North bank of the Pregel close to the Rathshof railway station.
They are builders of railway wagons and • passenger coaches. Their capacity in 1939 was estimated to be 2,000 standard 20-ton trucks per annum. In 1939 they employed some 1,200 workers, having increased their activity three-fold during the previous four years.
-411-
KONIGSBERG (contd.)
Odinwerk Aweider Allee (-)
The Odinwerk Maschinenfabrik u.
Giesserei Bartlick u. Rägler employed some JOO workers before the war and make M.V. components and machinery.
The works are in the South-east quarter of the town.
Optische Werke Holstein Königsberg (j) The Optische Werke Holstein are reported to have a factory in Königsberg making reflectors, aircraft detectors, and similar apparatus.
Oster & Co. Weidendamm (-)
This firm employed 200 workers before the war and manufactures high-pressure steel gas-cylinders.
Pertrix G.m.b.H. Hermann Goeringstr.(-)
The Pertrix Ostpreussische Elemente u.
Batteriefabrik G.m.b.H. are makers of smäll electric batteries and elements mainly for domestic use.
Viktoria Giesserei Granzer Allee (-) The Viktoria Eisengiesserei u. Maschinen­ fabrik Fritz Wittmoser are iron founders :.nd makers of gun parts. Their works are in the North-eastern suburb of Rothenstein.
Textile^ .ayon, Pulp and Paper
Feldmühle Feldmühle
Holsteiner Damm (j) Sackheim (j)
The Feldmühle Papier u. Zellstoffwerke A.G. have two large factories in Königs­ berg which formerly belonged to the Koholyt A.G. Both these factories have a similar range of products and make sulphite pulp. One of these factories, known as the Gosse works, is on the North bank of the Pregel opposite the dock area and the other, known as the Sackheim works, is East of the town on the North bank of the Neue Pregel in the suburb of Liep.
-412-
KÖNIGSBERG (oontd.)
Pood Stuffs
Gustav Karow Holsteiner Damm (-) This firm is a flour mill with a pre-war estimated daily output of 100 tons, situated on the North bank of the Pregel opposite the dock area and near to the Pre gel railway station.
Lagerhaus Holsteiner Damm (-) The grain silos and food-storage ware­ houses of the Königsberger Lagerhaus A.G, are adjacent to the Karow flour mill mentioned above. The silos had storage capacity for 60,000 tons of grain.
Kühlhaus Holsteiner Damm (-)
The large cold-storage warehouse and ice-making plant of the Königsberger Kühlhaus u, Kristall-Eis Fabrik A.G. is on the North bank of the Pregel close to the railway bridge.
Grain Silos Industriehafen (-)
Large grain storage warehouses are situated between the Industriehafen and the Freihafen.
---- o0o---—
KONLGSHULD (Silesia)
50° 45* N. 18° E: 785 miles: (1,000)
Königshuld is ten miles North East of Oppeln on the river Malapane, a tributary of the Oder. Apart from the VOHAG works mentioned below, there are no other industries.
Engineering and Armaments
VOHAG
Königshuld (3)
These works of the Vereinigte Oberschlesische Hüttenwerk A.G. comprise forging and pressing plant. Agricultural implements are the principal products of the Königshuld branch.
Further details regarding the VOHAG are given under Gleiwitz.
— — 0O 0— - —
-413-
K O N S T A N Z (Baden) 47° AO» N. 9° 10’ E: 495 m iles: (38,000) Konstanz i s a t th e W estern end o f Lake Constance a t the p oint where th e Rhine flows out o f th e la k e . The town’s railw ay connection w ith Germany c o n sists o f a branch lin e from Singen which a t Konstanz Jo in s th e Swiss railw ay along th e Southern shore o f th e la k e . To the N orth Konstanz i s cut o ff from th e German shore by th e North-western arm o f th e la k e . The town extends in to S w itzerland and th e f ro n tie r p asses through th e Southern suburbs. I t i s a h e a lth r e s o r t. The in d u s tr ie s , which in clu d e book p r in tin g , t e x t i l e fancy goods, and a few sm all chem ical w orks, a re unim portant, except f o r th e works l i s t e d below.
Chemicals and Explosives H.I.A.G. Konstanz (3) Known by th e name of H olzverkohlungs- In d u s trie A*G. (H .I.A .G .) t h i s i s a su b sid iary u n d ertak in g o f the Deutsche Gold- und S ilb e rs o h e id e a n s ta lt. B efore the amalgamation in 1926 H.I.A.G. headquarters were in Konstanz to g e th e r w ith th e re s e a rc h la b o r a to r ie s . B efore th e war the works were known to be engaged on producing chem icals based on e th y l a lc o h o l as th e raw m a te ria l: t h i s i s presumed to have now ceased. Wood d i s t i l l a t i o n was once c a r r ie d out on a co n sid erab le sc a le b u t, in view o f th e p re se n t unim portance o f t h i s p ro d u c t, p roduction o f i t may have ceased. T his rem ains, however, an im portant c e n tre f o r developing chem ical p ro c e sse s. ------- oOo-------
KORHWESTHEIM (Wttrtteniberg) 48° 55’ N. 9° 10' E: 450 m ile s: (12,000) Kornwestheim i s fiv e m iles N orth o f S tu ttg a r t and two m iles South o f Ludwigsburg. I t i s an im portant railw ay m a rsh a llin g centre f o r th e S tu ttg a r t goods t r a f f i c . The p rin c ip a l in d u s try i s a larg e boot and shoe fa c to ry and th e engineering works mentioned below.
T ra n sp o rta tio n
M arshalling Yards Kornwestheim (2) To th e West o f the town a re la rg e m arshal 1 ing yards capable o f handling 4,000 wagons p e r 24 hours. These a re th e la r g e s t y ards s e rving th e S tu ttg a rt a re a which in c lu d e s not only S tu ttg a r t i t s e l f b u t a ls o Ludwigsburg, W aiblingen, Böblingen and S in d elfin g en .
-414-
KORNWESTHEIM (contd.) Engineering and Armaments
A. Stotz A.G. Kornwestheim (3) These works include an iron foundry and forging shops and employed sane 900 workers before the war. Their products include heavy chains and conveyors.
Leather
Salamander A.G. Kornwestheim (3) The Salamander A.G. are the largest German boot and shoe manufacturers.
At their factory in Kornwestheim they are reported to employ seme 3,000 workers, including a large proportion of foreign labour. The factory is alongside the railway, close to the Kornwestheim railway station.
K 0 S E L (Silesia) 50° 20’ N. 18° 10’ E: 800 miles: (15,000) Kosel is on the right bank of the Oder 25 miles West of Gleiwitz. It is a railway junction of importance to thq coal­ mining and heavy industries of Upper Silesia. There is a large inland harbour serving the waterborne coal traffic from Upper Silesia which is here loaded on to the Oder barges.
The Klodnitz Canal (now renamed Adolf Hitler Canal), which was nearing completion in 1939, leaves the Oder at Kosel and leads to Gleiwitz where an extensive coal trans-shipment port has been constructed. This canal has probably reduced the importance of Kosel as regards coal trans-shipment but on the other hand Kosel has acquired additional value as an inland port owing to its proximity to the synthetic-oil plants at Blechhammer and Deschowitz.
Transportation Inland Harbour Kosel (2) The inland harbour is to the North of the town and consists of three docks entered from a basin cut out of the Eastern bank of the Oder. The docks are served by an extensive system of railway sidings and are capable of handling 3'5’ million tons per annum, 95^ of which in peacetime was coal.
The Klodnitz canal leaves the Oder immediately ' to the South of the dock area. A pipeline connects the Schaff gottsch*sehe synthetic-oil plant at Deschowitz with the inland harbour of Kosel. Deschowitz is six miles to the North.
Blechhammer, where there are 2 large synthetic- oil plants, is six miles East of Kosel and is situated on the Klodnitz Canal.
-415-
KOSEL (co n td .)
M arshalling Yards Kosel There are larg e m arshalling yards to the East of Kosel near to the small town of Heydebreck (o r Kandrzin) two m iles fron Kosel i t s e l f . From these yards the sidings diverge which serve the inland docks.
Railway Repair Shops Heydebreck These are medium-sized re p a ir shops undertaking the re p a ir o f goods wagons. ------- 0O0-------
KÖSUN (Pomerania) 54° 10» N. 16° 10» E: 710 m iles: (53,000) K öslin is on the main lin e from S te ttin to Danzig approximately halfway between the two. I t i s eight m iles from the B a ltic and is the junction fo r a branch lin e which follows the coast Westwards to Kolberg. The’ town is mainly an a g ric u ltu ra l centre. There is a small fish-canning industry, a paper facto ry , and two firm s making a g ric u ltu ra l implements and machinery; but none i s of importance. ------- o0o---- •— K 0 S W I G
See under COSWIG. ------- oOo-------
KOTTBUS
See under COTTBUS
■oOo——
-416-
K fl T H 2 N (A nhalt) 51° 45* W. 12° 2: 520 m iles: (29,000) Köthen is on th e main lin e from Magdeburg to H alle and is s ix m iles West o f Dessau. A lin e fro n Dessau to Bernburg and A schersleben c ro sse s th e main lin e a t Köthen. The p rin c ip a l in d u s try i s th e h ig h ly im portant Junkers works m entioned below.
Köthen»1 s o th e r a c t i v i t i e s in clu d e su g ar re fin in g and a few sm all en g in eerin g film s .
T ra n sp o rta tio n
Railway Ju n c tio n Köthen (3) The lin e from Dessau jo in s the main North to South li n e in th e N orthern p a r t o f th e town and th e lin e to Bernburg d iv erg es from i t in th e S outhern p a rt o f th e town. This E ast to West connection i s th e ra ilw a y .lin k between the Junkers works a t D essau, Köthen, B ernburg, and A schersleben, a t o t a l d ista n c e o f 30 m ile s. There a re m arsh allin g y ard s to th e South o f Köthen.
Railw ay R epair Shops Köthen (3) These shops undeartake th e re p a ir o f goods wagons and locom otives.
A irc ra ft and Aero Engines
Ju n k ers Köthen (1) The Köthen aero -en g in e works o f th e Junkers Flugzeug u . Motorenbau G.m.b.H, has fo r some y e a rs been th e la r g e s t s e r i a l p ro duction u n it f o r Ju n k ers a e ro -e n g in es. They have been p rim a rily engaged on th e p ro d u ctio n o f th e Jumo 211 en g in e, b u t th e re were signs in 1943 th a t th e y were tu rn in g over to p ro d u c tio n t r i a l s f o r newly developed d esig n s.
In 1942 th ey were re p o rte d to be employing 15,000 w orkers. . Bernburg, th e main Junkers assem bly p la n t, i s s ix m ile s to th e West o f Köthen.
K R A I B U R G
See under MUHLDORF
— ------0O 0— —
-417-
KREffffpD (Rhineland) 51° 20« N. 6° 35« Es 285 mies: (170,000) Krefeld lies on the west cf the Rhine, some 15 miles N.W* of Düsseldorf, and is one of the most inportant railway junctions in Western Germany# In addition to numerous secondary lines, four main lines meet at Krefeld, namely from Holland in the N.W., Belgium in the S.W., Dasseldorf in the S.E., and the Ruhr in the N.E« Ri Ik manufacture, of which Krefeld was the centre before the war, is now of secondary importance since the development of the Deutsche Edelstahlwerke A.G. which specialises in the production of special steel particularly for the aircraft industry. There are also several light engineering works.
Krefeld has been heavily damaged by bombing« The damage is concentrated in the centre of the town and in the area surround­ ing the Adolf Hitler Strasse and the West Wall# The nearby town of Uerdingen is described under its own heading«
Transportation Marshalling Yards Krefeld These yards, lying near the main station, are at the South-eastern end of the Ruhr industrial area at the point where the very heavy East-West traffic from the Ruhr splits, part going SLR. to Cologne and the Rhine valley and part going S.W. to Aachen, and Belgium and Prance. The capacity of the yards before the war was 2,000 wagons per 24 hours« Railway Repair Shops Oppum (3) These workshops are situated in the Eastern suburb of Oppum. In 1927 there were 78 passenger coach and 130 wagon repair stands« la 1937 the number of employees was 1 ,200«
Public Utility Services Gasworks Krefeld (3) These gas works are owned by the Municipality and are situated within the built-up area of the town« In 1937 they purchased 62 million and sold 520 million cubic feet of gas«
-418-
KREFELD (contd.) Iron and Steel
Edelstahlwerke Gladbacherstr. (1) The Deutsche EdelstahlwerksA.G. is a subsidiary company of the Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G. of Dusseldorf: it is situated in the extreme South West of Krefeld. This works is a special steel producer *par excellence* and among the fabricators concerned with the production of rolled nickel, used principally in the manufacture of annodes, sheets, rods, bars and tubing. The estimated productive capacity is believed to be 250 tons per annum. (222 tons were produced in 1938).
It has two steel plants in Krefeld, whose combined capacity is estimated at about 250,000 tons per annum of open- hearth and electric steel. The works is also one of the principal consumers of ferro-alloys. In 1937 there were some 6,000 workers. The factory has its own station and railway sidings.
Engineering and Armaments
Dornbusch & Co. Industriestr. (-)
The engineering works of Dornbusch & Co. are situated in the Western quarter of the town, and employed some 250 workers in 1939 on the manufacture of various types of engraving machinery and presses.
J.Kleinewerfers Söhne Industriestr. (-) This plant is adjacent to the Dornbusch works and made textile machinery. The company employed some 250 workers in 1939.
Carl Zangs Oberdiessemerstr. (-)
The works of the Maschinenfabrik Carl Zangs A.G. are in the Southern part of the town immediately to the East of the Hauptbahnhof. They employed some 800 workers in 1938 on the manufacture of all types of looms and other textile machinery. Their present activity i s not known.
Siempelkanrp Ritt erst r. (-)
G.Siempelkamp & Co. whose works are situated in the centre of the town, make hydraulic presses and other machinery for the textile and chemical industries. They employed some 400 workers before the war.
-419-
KREFELD (contd.)
Titanit Hartmetall G.m.b.H. Krefeld (3)
This is a subsidiary of Deutsche Edelstahlwerke of Krefeld (see under Iron and Steel). They manufacture carbides which are used in the manufacture of tips for machine tools.
Krefelder Stahlwerke Krefeld (j)
This firm is one of the chief manufacturers of rolling mills and rolling mill equip­ ment. They specialise in the manufacture of rolls.
— >— 0O0-------
K R I M ftI T S C H A U
See under CRIMMITSCHAU
-------0O0-----
KRÜMMEL (Schleswig Holstein)
See under Düneberg -- — oOo— — -
KRUPPAMÜBLE (Silesia) 50° 35* N. 18° 35* E: 810 miles: (1,000)
Kruppamüble is in Upper Silesia 30 miles East of Oppeln and near to the railway station of Keilerswalde on a branch railway leading from Oppeln to Tarnowitz (in Poland) and within 3 miles of the former Polish frontier. Apart from the explosives factory mentioned below there is no industrial development but the pre-war population will now have been largely increased presumably by the erection of workers’ camps.
Chemicals and Explosives
Lignose Sprengstoff G.m.b.H. Kruppamüble (2) This factory is operated by the Lignose Sprengstoff G.m.b.H., but, owing to its inaccessible situation in Upper Silesia, there is very little up-to-date info ma t ion regarding its activities.
/The
-420-
KRUPPÄMÜHLE (Contd.)
Lignose Sprengstoff G.m.b.H. (contd.) The factory covers a large area and is believed to be well equipped; but, owing to its bad strategic situation in close proximity to the fomer Polish frontier, it does not appear to have been much used for m ilitary purposes u n til some time after the invasion of Poland. Ground reports since that date suggest that the factory has now become of great importance, and although there is no a ir reconnaissance to confirm this, the reports must be considered of substance in view of the strategic situation of the plant, which is now as favourable as it was at one time dangerous.
It has been reported that the factory manufactures hexanitrodiphenylamine, tetry l and T.N.T., and that i t has its own n itric-acid plant. It has also been reported that the factory makes nitro­ glycerine and nitrocellulose. It is not common practice to manufacture high explosives and propellant explosives in the same plant, but since the Kruppamühle factory was used for many years for the production of mining explosives, it probably has a nitroglycerine plant, and fo r this reason a propellants section may have been developed.

KpSTRIN (Brandenburg) 52° 35* N. U ° 40» E: $30 miles: (22,000) Küstrin is situated 20 miles North of Frankfurt a. d. Oder on the right bank of the Oder, on the tongue of land formed by the junction of the tributary Warthe with the main stream. To the East of the town the channels of the Warthe form an extensive area of marshland. A large garrison was stationed in Küstrin before the war. It is on the main line from Berlin through Schneidemühl to Danzig and to Danzig and to East Prussia and is a railway junction of some importance. The town’ s a ctiv ities are largely concerned with agriculture and there are some small engineering works making agricultural implements. A large cellulose factory which was recently built in Küstrin is mentioned below.
-421-
KÖSTRIN (contd.)
Transportation Railway Junction Küstrin (}) The main West to East railway passes over three bridges inside the town area, two across the Oder which at this point divides to form an island, and one across the Warthe. A second main line coming from the direction of Silesia along the right bank of the Oder crosses the Warthe by a fourth railway bridge and joins the main track in the Northern pari; of the town.
This line continues Northwards, forming a direct route between Silesia and Stettin.
Two further branch lines lead from Küstrin into the Eastern parts of Brandenburg.
Railway Repair Shops Küstrin (?) These are medium sized repair shops under­ taking the repair of goods wagons. Adjacent to the repair shops are marshalling yards and a goods station.
Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper Zellstoff Fabrik Küstrin (3) Prior to the war the Zellstoff Fabrik Küstrin A.G. produced viscose staple fibre at the rate of 60 tons per day.
The company was formed in 1936 with the object of erecting this new factory which first went into production in 1938.
Food Stuffs
Kartoffelmehl Fabrik Küstrin (-) The Norddeutsche Kartoffelmehl Fabrik G.m.b.H. are producers of potato flour, starch and other potato products.
