- T -
THE
BOMBER'S BAEDEKER

(Guide to the Economic Importance of German Towns and Cities)
2nd (1944)
Edition.

Part II.
LAHR - ZWICKAU

Enemy Branch
(Foreign Office & Ministry of
Economic Warfare)

- T3 -

THE BOMBER'S BAEDEKER

(Guide to the Economic Importance of German Towns and Cities)
2nd (1944)
Edition.

PART II.

LAHR-ZWICKAU

- 422 -

LAHR (Baden)
48° 20' N. 7° 55' E: 420 miles: (17,000)

  Lahr is between Karlsruhe and Freiburg on the main railway line
 to Basle. It lies in the foothills of the Black Forest, and is
 a tourist resort. The towids activities include cardboard, leather,
 and wood manufacture. None of these is of importance.


LANDAU (Bavaria)
49° 10' N. 8° 5' E:  400 miles: (20,000)

  Landau is a railway junction of seme importance to the railway
 system of the Bavarian Palatinate. It lies on the line fron Karlsruhe
 and Bruchsal to the Saar Territory. This line is crossed at Landau
 by the North to South line from Mainz to Strasburg. The town is in
 the wine-growing district of the Palatinate, and is also an important
 cattle market and agricultural centre. There is no noteworthy
 industry


LANDSBERG (Brandenburg)
52° 45' N. 15° 15' E: 660 miles: (46,000)

  Landsberg an der Warthe is East of Ktlstrin, and within 10 miles
 of the former Polish frontier. It is on the main railway line from
 Berlin to Insterburg and the Eastern Front. It has a small inland
 port for the barge traffic on the River Warthe. The town is mainly
 an agricultural centre, but there is a jute mill, which is
 mentioned below, and there are reports that the Agfa photographic
 film concern has established a new factory here.

 Transportation

  Inland Port       Landsberg (-)

   This small inland port, which before the war
   handled some 120,000 tons per year, mostly
   agricultural produce, deals with the barge traffic
   on the River Warthe, which flows into the Oder at
   Ktlstrin, 6 miles to the West.

 Chemicals and Explosives  
 
   Agfa       Landsberg (-)
   The A.G. für Anilin Fabrikation (Agfa) a
   subsidiary of the I.G. Farben, and the largest
   photographic film making concern in Europe, are
   reported to have planned the erection of a branch
   factory in Landsberg an der Warthe. This branch,
   which was originally intended to go into production
   by 1938 was to be equipped for the entire process
   of film manufacture, with a capacity equal to
   of the main Agfa plant at Wolfen (near Bitterfeld).
   Reports suggest that the factory was erected during
   the early part of the war and that it is now in
   operation.

- 423 -

 

 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper
 
  Max Bahr A.G.      Landsberg (-)

   The Jutespinnerei & Weberei, Plan &
   Sackfabrik Max Bahr A.G. have a jute
   spinning and weaving mill at Landsberg
   which employed some 1 ,800 workers before the
   war. There are reports indicating that a large
   textile mill was under construction 4 miles to
   the Northwest of Lard, sb erg which was expected to
   go into production in September 1943' but these
   reports have remained without satisfactory
   confirmation. The present activity of the Max
   Bahr A.G-. factory is hot known.

LANDSHUT (Bavaria)
43° 30' N. 12° 10' E:  580 miles: (32,000)

  Landshut is on the river Isar and on the main line from Munich to
 the Czech frontier. It is also on a cross country line from Regensburg
 to Salzburg and Upper Austria. It is a market town and there are
 several small industries, including flour milling, sugar refining,
 and the making of agricultural implements. None of these is
 individually of importance.

 Transportation

  Railway Repair Shops    Landshut (3)
   These are medium sized repair shops undertaking
   the repair of goods wagons.

 Foodstuffs

  Kunstmtthlen      Landshut (-)


   The Ver. Kunstmühlen Landshut Rosenheim A.G-.
   are flour millers, and have a grain storage
   plant in Landshut with a capacity for
   40,000 tons.



LANGENBIENA (Silesia)
50° 40' N. 16° 35' E: 730 miles:  (20,000)

   Lapgeribielan is J miles frem the town of Reichenbach in Lower
 Silesia. Its industry, which is on a small scale, is mainly textiles,
 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper
  Christian Dierig A.G.      LangeribielauF
  G-.F. Flechtner ) (-)
  Kaufftaaim Meyer A.G-.    Wttstegiersdorf)
    These are three examples of a number of small ootton
    spinning, weaving, and textile finishing firms in the
    Langeribielau district.

- 424 - 

LANGENFELD (Rhineland)
51° 5' N. 6° 55' E: 485 miles: (17,000)


 Langenfeld is 9 miles Southwest of Solingen, and is a municipality
which was formed by amalgamating several small settlements, including
Hardt and Immigrath. Apart from the engineering works mentioned below,
there are no industries of importance.

 Engineering and Armaments

Kronprinz Immigrath (-)

  The Kronprinz A.G. für Metallindustrie of Solingen-
  Ohligs have a small factory at Immigrath, with
  tolling mills and wire-drawing plant. This firm,
  which makes principally steel tubes, M.V.
  components, S.A.A., etc., is described under
  Solingen.

   LANGEREELD (Rhineland)
   See under WUPPERTAL


LAUBAN (Silesia)
51° 5' N. 15° 15' E: 665 miles: (17,000)


  Lauban is on the railway line between Gftrlitz and Breslau. In
peace-time textiles are the main industry, and the town specialises
in the manufacture of handkerchiefs. There are over 100 factories,
none of individual importance, w hich in 1938 employed between them
some 4,000 workers. Lauban is a market town for cattle and horses,
and there are large railway-repair shops.

 Transportation

Railway Repair Shops Lauban (3)
  These repair shops are believed to employ
  some 1500 workers and undertake the repair
  of electric and steam locomotives and rolling
  stock.


LAUCHERTHAL (Hohenzollem)
See under SIGMARINGE N.

- 425 -

LAUENBERG (Pomerania)
54° 35' N. 17° 45' E:   775 miles: (19,000)

 Lauenburg is in the Eastern part of Pomerania within 6 miles of
  the former Polish frontier It mist not be confused with Laueriburg
  in Schleswig-Holst ein. It is on the main line from Stettin to Danzig
  and is the Junction for a branch line leading to Leba, a small
  fishing harbour on the Baltic, 20 miles to the North. The tcwm's
  activities are mainly agricultural, and there are a number of
  furniture and barrel making factories.

 Transportation

   Railway Repair Shops     Lauenburg (3)
  These are medium-sized repair shops undertaking
  the repair of goods wagons.


LAUTA (Brandenburg)
51° 30' N. 14° E:   615 miles: (6,000)

 Lanta is near Senftenberg in the extreme South of the Province
  of Branienburg, dose to the border of Lower Silesia. It is 21 miles
  South-east of Finsterwalde. The surrounding area has extensive
  brown-coal deposits, and adjacent to one of the brown-coal mines
  is a very large electric station supplying power to the highly
  important alurvnnium plant described below.

 Public Utility Services

   Power Station      Lautawerk (1)
  This thermal power station is owned by Vereinigte
  Aluminium Werke A.G-. and has an installed capacity
  of 222 W. It forms part of the site of the largest
  aluminium works in Germany (see under Non-ferrous
  Metals), The electrical output of the station is
  mainly, if not wholly, supplied to the aiuonnium
  works whose maxiimm demand is estimated to be at
  least 200 MW end whose annual requirements are
  about 1500 million kWh.
    The station is connected to Trattendorf, G-olpa#
  and Niederwartha stations by 110 kV lines, via which
  the requirements of the aluminium works can be
  supplemented.

   Power Station      LAUTAWEfK NORD (3)
  There is a smaller power station attached to
  the Erika brown-coal mine owned by the Use
  Bergbau A.G., It has an installed capacity
  of 30 W.


- 426 -

 Solid Fuels


  Grube Erika      Lautawexk Nord (3)
  The Erika brown-coal mine belongs to the Use
  Bergbau A.G., and had an annual output of about
  2,800,000 tons in 1937. A large briquetting
  plant adjoins the mine. Approximately 1 ,000
  workers were employed before the war.

 Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

  VAWAG       Lautawerk  (1)
  The extensive works of the Vereinigte
  Aluminium Werke A.G. are situated one mile
  to the East of Lauta and on the Northern
  side of the railway from Ruhland to Liegnitz
  and Lower Silesia, which passes through this
  neighbourhood in an easterly direction. The
  works have a capacity for 70,000 tons of
  aluminium and 120,000 tons of alumina per annum.
  The works have been repeatedly extended in recent
  years. Several thousand workers, including a
  large proportion of foreign labour, are enployed
  at this plant, which is one of the most important
  of the German non-ferrous metal industry.

LECHFELD (Bavaria)
48° 10' N. 10° 50' E:    555 miles: 0

 Lechfeld is a railway halt on a branch railway which follows
 the course of the river Lech to the South of Augsburg. On the
 "Lechf eld”, which is the name given to wide plain through which
 the river flows, is an aircraft experimental station.

 Aircraft and Aero-Engines

  Airfield      Lechfeld (-)

  The Messerschmitt concern of Augsburg have ah
  aircraft experimental station on the G.A.F. Airfield
  at Lechfeld. It is believed that the experimental
  station is mainly engaged on the development of
  aircraft proto-types.

- 427 -

LEHRTE (Westphalia)
52° 21' N. 9° 58' E:  435 miles: (11,000)



 The town of Lehrte is situated 10 miles East of Hanover.
  The main Berlin-Ruhr Autobahn runs East-West just North of the
  town and the Mittelland Canal makes a broad sweep 5 miles to the
  South and meets the branch canal from Hildesheim. Lehrte is
  an important railway junction; it stands at a point where the
  main heavy-goods route from Berlin to Paris via Hanover and the
  Ruhr is crossed by Germany s most important North- South line
  leading from Hamburg to Prankfort/llain and Munich. The town
  has some light engineering works, a sugar factory, and a
  chemical works.

 Transportation

   Marshalling Yard     Lehrte  (2)
  The marshalling yard is situated West of the town
  and at its Eastern end merges into the railway
  junction. The yard has a capacity for 4,000 wagons
  in 24 hours. The important locomotive depots are
  in the centre of the junction.

 Public Utility Services

   Transformer station     W.of Lehrte (2)
  The 220/110 kV open-air transformer and switching
  station is situated 3 miles West of Lehrte and 7
   miles East of Hanover in open country inmediately
  adjacent to the Hanover-Lehrte railway line. It
  is owned by Preussische Elektrizitats A.G-. and is
  an important link in the electricity supply system
  controlled by that company)
it is the junction of
  the East-west North-south 220 kV line and is the
  main load-distributing station in the whole net-
  work of the conpany.
  The plant is in two main sections; one section is
  for 220 kV and the other for 110 kV, 50'kV, and
  lower voltages. The 220 kV lines connect to
  Harbke, Bielefeld, and possibly Hamburg.
  A 220 kV line runs South to the Borken brown-coal
  station and Bringhausen punped-storage plant, both
  owned by the Ccnpany, thereby providing for large
  extra sources of supply of power.
  The 110 kV lines connect to Ahlem and other
  districts, but details of these are not available.
  There is most probably a 220 kV connection to the
  large private station at the H. Göring works at
  Hallendorf. The station is the main standby
  for supply of current to the town of Hanover.

- 428 -


  Chemicals and Explosives

Chemische Fabrik Lehrte G.nub.H. Hanover. Lehrte  (3)  

   This firmis one of the chief manufacturers
   of chlorinated solvents in Germany
   Main product is Trichlor ethylene.


    LEIPHEIM (Bavaria)

    See under ULM

LEIPZIG (Saxony)
51° 20' N. 12° 20' E:  540 miles:  (720,000)

  Leipzig is the largest town in Saxony. It is highly industrialised,
particularly in textiles and. engineering. Prior to the war the
famous Leipzig Trade Fair draw a large conmercial public from all
parts of the world. Leipzig s main railway station is the largest
in Europe. The Supreme Courts of Law of the Reich are established in
the city and Leipzig is also the centre of the German publishing
industry. Railway lines radiate from the city in all directions, and
there are extensive marshalling yards which form an inportant base for
the traffic to the Eastern Front. Leipzig's industries have been devel-
oped chiefly on the outskirts of the town ani can be divided into two
main groups. The first extends from the main station to the North East
and South of the city. This area contains several important
engineering plants, spinning and weaving mills, and the Northern power
station. The second industrial group is on the Western outskirts.
This district includes some of the largest wool and cotton spinning
mills in Europe and a number of big engineering works. During the war
important aircraft assembly plants have been established on the
airfield at Mochau on the North-eastern edge of the town area. The
city also contains a number of chemical works, mostly engaged on the
manufacture of soap and dyestuffs.

 Transportation

Railway Centre     Leipzig   (2)
   This terminal station, which is the largest
   building of its kind in Europe, is an important
   centre serving many parts of Germany and the
   Continent. In particular there are lines leading
   from Leipzig to Berlin, Breslau, Dresden Frankfort,
   Halle, and Southern Germany. The area includes
   marshalling yards, postal sidings and storage
   depots


- 429 -



 Marshalling Yards     Paunsdorf  (3)
   These marshalling yards, which are situated in
   the Eastern suburb of Paunsdorf, can handle up
   to 3500 wagons per 24 hours.

 Marshalling Yards     Wahren  (3)
   These yards are in the North-western suburb
   of Wahren. They have a capacity of 4500
   wagons per 24 hours.

 Railway Repair Shops      Delitzsch (3)
   At Delitzsch, 10 miles North of Leipzig, there
   are railway workshops formerly employing scan©
   1,200 workers and undertaking chiefly the repair
   of goods wagons.

 Power Station       Böhlen   (1)

   This very large thermal power station is owned
   by the A.G. Sächsische Werke (aSW) and has an
   installed capacity of 393 MW. It is situated
   on the brown-coal deposits at Böhlen, 11 miles
   S. of Leipzig, and is part of a large industrial
   complex which includes, besides the power station,
   a synthetic-oil plant (described below under
   Liquid Fuels), a low temperature carbonisation
   plant, (described below under S. F.), and
   a gas-works (described below). The station is
   operated on base load and supplies current to the
   grid system and the city of Leipzig and is also
   the source of power to the synthetic-oil plant,
   whose estimated maximum demand is 75 MW with an
   annual consumption of over 500 million kWh.
   Five long-distance double-circuit 110 kV lines run
   to Chemnitz, Gossnitz, Zeitz, Lausen, and Leipzig
   respectively and another probably connects with
   the neighbouring double station of E: penhain-
   Molbis. Local 30 kV supplies connect to Leipzig
   by underground cables and at lower voltages to
   neighbouring industrial works.

 Gasworks        Bohlen  (3)
   The gas works is part of the ASW complex at
   BShlen and was erected in 1939 by the Company
   for the supply of domestic gas to Leipzig and
   the surrounding district. It operates the
   Luigi complete-gasification process, using
   brown coal. Capacity is belived to be about
   5,000 million cu.ft. per annum.


- 430 -


 Power Station      Espenhain-Mölbis (1)
   This large power station belongs to the ASW and
   has an installed capacity of 297 M'. It is
   situated between the villages of E: penhain and
   Mölbis, on the brown-coal fields about 5 miles
   East of the Böhlen station, and forms part of an
   industrial complex which includes a low-temperature
   carbonisation plant and a large new works as yet
   unidentified. It is a double station with
   duplicate generating plants 250'yards apart
   arranged opposite and parallel to each other.
   There is one switching and transformer station
   common to both sections, and it is assumed
   that a large part of the electrical output is
   supplied to the nearby industrial plant, to
   which steamis also supplied. The station
   was under construction at the beginning of the
   war and details are therefore incomplete.
   There are at least 4 long-distance overhead
   transmission lines, 2 running South-east
   (possibly one to Dresden and one to Chemnitz),
   one North-east (possibly to Leipzig), and one
   West (possibly to Böhlen).

 Power Station      Kulkwitz   (2)
   This thermal power station is owned by the
   Landkraftwerke Leipzig A.G. Kulkwitz, and is
   situated on the brown coal fields 6 miles
   South-west of Leipzig. It is an old station,
   and up to 1938 was only of local importance,
   with an installed capacity of 30 W. Since that
   year it has been considerably extended and its
   capacity increased to 105 MW. It is probable
   that the station now gives additional supplies
   to nearby industrial works and to the city of
   Leipzig, and also to the high-voltage grid of
   the A.G. Sächsische Werke.

 StÄdt, Gaswerke     Leipzig   (2)
   The municipal gasworks is the principal
   distributing station on the Thuringian gas
   grid. It now obtains all its supplies from
   the Böhlen gasworks (see above). In 1936,
   the works made 1 ,950 million cu. ft. of gas
   and purchased for re-sale a further 90
   million cu. ft.

- 431 -

 

 Solid Fuels

   Brown-coal Mines     Böhlen  (-)

  There are a number of brown-coal deposits
   adjacent to the small town of Böhlen some
   10 miles South of Leipzig. They are qpei-
   cast mines and are exploited mainly by the
   A.G. Sächsische Werke (ASW) of Dresden They
   supply the two power stations, also owned by
   the same company, which are mentioned above
   unier P. U. S. The mine includes a
   briquetting plant which produced 3,3^7,000
   tons in 1937. Sane 1,360 workers were then
   employed.

 Liquid Fuels and Substitutes

  Brabag       Böhlen  (2)
  The Braunkohlen Benzin A.G-. whose headquarters
   are in Berlin, have at Böhlen a low-temperature
   carbonisation and brown-coal tar-hydrogenation
   plant for the manufacture of synthetic oil.
   It is adjacent to the power station, mentioned
   above under P. U. S., It is estimated
   that the hydrogenation plant has an annual
   capacity of 300 000 tons and it is thought
   possible that there is in addition a high-pressure
   Fischer-JTropsch plant.

 Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

  Leiohtmetallwerke    Rackwitz   (3)
  The Leipziger Leichtmetallwerke is situated
   in the cutlying suburb of Rackwitz, sone
   6 miles to the North of the town. It
   specialises in the production and fabrication
   of light-metal alloys.

  Edmund Becker & Go. A.G-.    Leutzsch   (3)
  This factory is believed to have employed
   some 1,200 workers in 1939, on the manufacture
   of light-metal castings for the aircraft industry.

  Metallgussgesellschaft nub.H.  Leutzsch   (3)
  This is a subsidiary of Edmund Beaker & Co.
   A.G-. mentioned above. It is situated in the
   Western suburb of Leutzsch, and is engaged on
   the production of light-metal castings for the
   aircraft industry. The plant is reported to
   have been greatly enlarged since the outbreak
   of war.

- 432 -



 Aircraft and Aero-Engines

  Aircraft Assembly Plants				(-)

   The former municipal airport is situated in
   the North-eastern suburb of Mockau Since the
   war A.T.G,, Erla and Junkers have all erected
   assembly plants on the airfield and they are
   closely interlinked with the components works
   in other parts of the city.


 'Erla”       Mockau  2)
 'Erla”       Heiterblick 1)
  ” Erla”       Abtnaundorf  3)

 'Erla"       Leipzig proper (Werk V)  2)
   The Erla Masohineiwerk G. m.b.H. with its
   various components factories forms a largely
   self-contained complex capable ofconstruction
   and complete assembly of aircraft In 1943
   it became one of the three large assembly
   units for Me 109 under the fighter expansion
   programme. The main assembly plant is situated
   on the aerodrome at Mockau, a small suburb lying
   a few miles to the North East of the town. The
   chief components factory is in the North-eastern
   suburb of Heit erblick, and there is another in
   Abtnaundorf, also to the North-east The works
   at Mockau are engaged on the assembly of Me.109
   fighters The Heiterblick factory produces major
   aircraft components, including wings and fuselages,
   and various reports indicate that the plant was
   employing up to 10,000 workers prior to the attack
   by the VUIth Air Force. The Abtnaundorf factory
   is also engaged on the manufacture of aircraft
   components, probably wings. (Werk V was the
   former Kammgarnspinnerei and is believed to be
   engaged on press work and machining.)

  A.T.G.       Mockau  (2)
  A.T.G.       Grosszschodher 2)
  A.T.G.       Eutritz   2)
  A.T.G.       Leutzsch   3)
   The Allgemeine Transportanlagen G.m.b.H. is of
   considerable importance as a bomber factory to
   the German aircraft industry. The main asseuibly
   plant of this concern is situated on the aerodrome
   at Mockau. It formerly produced He.111, but
   gradually went over to the Ju. 88 Some production
   of Ju. 52 transports has been going on since before
   the war.


- 433 -

 

   It is reported to employ some 5000 workers©
   The chief branch factory is in the South-
   western suburb of Grosszschocher and
   manufactures major aircraft components, including
   wings and fuselages© A second subsidiary factory
   at Grosszschocher is situated immediately to the
   North-west of the above-mentioned plant. In the
   North at Hut ritz and in the West at Leutzsch are
   two further factories, one making fuselages, the
   second other components. The Leutzsch works were
   formerly part of the Hupfeld Gebr. Zimmermann A.G.
   makers of pianos and furniture©
   A.T.G© have in addition 3 or 4 other small plants
   in Leipzig or its vicinity but the exact location
   and activity is not known©

Motorenwerke Seegeritz (Taucha) (2)
 The Mitteldeutsche Motorenwerke is situated in
 the North-eastern suburb of Seegeritz. It is
 a subsidiary of the Auto-Union and carries on
 the manufacture of the Juma 211 and 21J aero-
 engines.under licence© It is also important
 for the manufacture of crankshafts and other
 aero-engine components, and may make the
 Jumo 004 turbine unit.

  Junkers       Mockau  (3)
 The Junkers concern have a works on the aerodrome
 at Mockau, which is reported to be engaged on
 the repair, maintenance, and assembly of Ju© 88
 and Ju© 52 aircraft.

  World Pair     Leipzig   (3)
 The buildings of the Leipzig World Pair (Leipziger
 Messe) are on the Ausstellung sgelande on the Western
 side of the railway and South-west of the
 Stötteritz Bahnhof. The Exhibition Halls are said
 to have been taken over and used as engineering
 shops by the Junkers concern in particular for
 the repair depot at Mockau©

 Engineering and Armaments

  Hugo Schneider A.G.     Paunsdorf  (1)
 The parent works of this important engineering
 firm are in the suburb of Paunsdorf on the
 Eastern side of Leipzig, There are branch
 factories in Berlin and überweissbach in
 Thuringia© They produce rods, sheets, wire and
 constructional parts in copper, brass and
 aluminium and in peacetime are makers of all
 kinds of heating, lighting and cooking apparatus,
 enamelled goods and vacuum flasks. They employed
 some 9,000 workers before the war. They are now
 reported to be making light arms, S.A.A. and armament
 cocponents. It is believed that a portion of the foimer
 machine-tool production of the Schiess A.G. of Busseldorf
 has now been transferred to these works©



- 434 -



  Kollmann Werke A.G.     Torgauerstr. (3)
  This firm, which in 1938 enployed about 1,000
  workers, manufactures gears, machine tools, and
  torpedo components particularly propellor shafts
  and gears. A recent report suggests that the gears
  are destined for use in the Opel, Daimler-Benz,
  and Autc-ünion factories

  Kugellagerfabrik    Leipaig  (3)
  Kugellagerfabrik     Bohlitz-Ehr eriberg (3)
  The Deutsche Kugellagerfabrik G.m.b.H. are
  believed to have two plants in Leipzig, one in
  the centre of the town, the other in the Western
  suburb of Böhlitz-Ehrenberg. The company
  manufactures a variety of types of ball bearings
  including needle bearings, formerly used particularly
  in aircraft and now probably in A.F.V. ¹ s. It is
  believed to employ 1 ,200 workers.

  Büssing-41. A. G-.     Leipzig  (2)
  The parent works of this important undertaking
  is in Brunswick° The Leipzig branch constructs
  armoured cars and engines for A.F.V's and is
  also reported to carry out heavy repairs of
  military vehicles. Reports suggest that some
  6,000 workers are employed.

  Meier & Weichelt    Weicheltstr. (2)
  The Meier & Weichelt Stahlwerke are makers
  of grinding and polishing machinery, steel
  furniture, lathes and machine tools for the
  metal- and wood-working industries. It has been
  reported that their works have been enlarged during
  the war and that a portion of the former machine
  tool production of the Schiess A.G-. of Düsseldorf
  has been transferred to this film. Meier &
  Weichelt are also one of the leading German makers
  of track shoes and links for tanks and semi-tracked
  vehicles, and have also been reported to be making
  gun parts. Reports indicate that in 1943 acme
  4,000 workers were employed.

  Karl Krause     Zweinaundorf erstr. (3)
  The engineering film of Karl Krause K.G.
  formerly manufactured machinery for the paper,
  board, and printing industries. They are now
  reported to employ some 1500 workprs on the
  production of tank and small-aims components.

- 435 -


Pittier A.G, Wahren (3)

Pittier A.G, Plagwitz (3)


 The Pittier Werkzeugmaschinenfabrik have
 two factories in Leipzig. The first is in the
 North-western suburb of Wahren, the second in
 the Western district of Plagwitz. The company
 specialises in the manufacture of machine tools,
 and in 1936 employed over 2,000 workers' Reports
 suggest that parts of these works are now engaged
 on the manufacture of machine guns and ammunition
 components.

 Rohrleitungsbau A.G.    Leipzig  (3)
 The Deutsche Rohrleitungsbau A.G. is a subsidiary
 company of the Mannesmannrö'hren -Werke at Düsseldorf.
 In 1939 it employed several hundred workers on the
 manufacture of large metal containers, steel tubing,
 and various other iron and steel installations.

 Bleiohert G.m.b.H.     Kais er-Friedrich Str (3)

 The Bleichert-4Fransportanlagen G.m.b.H. have
 their main works in Leipzig and a branch factory
 in Magdeburg. The Leipzig plant is engaged on
 the manufacture of conveyors, electrical vehicles,
 and trailers, and is believed to employ several
 hundred workers.

 Müller & Montag     Lutznerstr. (-)

 This firm, which employs some 250'workers,
 makes all types of lathes, boring and
 grinding machinery.

 G-ebr. Brehmer      Karl Heine Str. (3)
 This firm employs some 800 workers on the
 production of machinery for the printing
 industry.

 Horn       Dieskaustr. (2)
 The engineering firm of Dr. Theo. Horn formerly
 manufactured all types of meters, revolution
 counters, and small electric motors. It is now
 reported to be employing up to 3 '000 workers and
 since the war has greatly expanded its aircraft-
 instrument range, which now includes artificial
 horizons, turn- and bank-indicators, rate-of-
 climb indicators, etc.

- 436 -


  Schumann & Co.     Karl Heine Str. (3)
 This company formerly made all types of valves
 and heating apparatus. They are now reported to
 employ some 450'workers and to manufacture
 components for submarines, and shells.

  Tura-Werk G.nub.H.     Luppens tr. (-)

 This firm normally makes cash registers and
 slot machines and before the war employed some
 500 workers. They are probably now manufacturing
 war products suitable to this type of plant.

  Kiesewetter     Gutenbergstr. (3)
 Rudolf Kiesewetter, Excelsior Werk are manufacturers
 of all types of electrical measuring instruments,
 including volt-meters and ammeters, from small
 pocket instruments of single and combined types, to
 larger switchboard types. They normally employ
 some 400 workers.

  Rudolf Sack K.G.    Leipzig   (3)
 This firmis believed to employ over 2,000 workers
 on the production of all types of agricultural tools
 and machinery. In 1937 the plant had an approximate
 daily output of 1,000 ploughs.

 Chemicals and Explosives

Springer & lioller JUG.    Franz Flemming Str. (-)


 This company employed some 650'workers, before
 the war on the manufacture of varnishes and dyes.

  Schulz A.G.     Hadenbergstr. (-)

 The Fritz Schulz A.G. specialises in polishing
 and cleansing preparations. They employed 450
 workers before the war.

  Otto Strumpf A.G.    Bitterfelderstr. (-)

 The Otto Strumpf A.G. are manufacturers of
 pharmaceuticals and cosmetics. In 1937 they
 employed some 700 workers.

  Heine & Co. A.G.    Leipzig   (-)

 This is one of several firms in Leipzig which
 specialises in the manufacture of soaps, perfumes
 and cosmetics. It had a pre-war total of 250'vzorkers.



- 437 -

 

 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper
 
  StbhrA.G.      Plagwitz (3)
  This large textile concern has its main works
  in Leipzig and branch factories in Ch^unitz, and
  the Ruhr, and also in Holland. The Leipzig
  factory is situated in the Western suburb of
  Plagwitz and includes one of the largest wool-
  spinning mills in Europe. Its equipment comprises
  122 combers, 137,000 spimiles and 38,000 doublers.
  In 1937 they employed a total of some 3,300 workers.

Wollkaninerei     Volbedingstr. (3)
  The Leipziger Wollkänmerei A.G. is a subsidiary
  company of the Stohr concern. This wool combing
  plant, which is reputed to be the third largest
  of its kind in Germany, is situated to the North-east
  of the main railway station. In 1939 some 2,000
  workers were employed.

  Baumwollspinnerei    Schonau (3) 
   The Leipziger Baumwollspinnerei A.G. is situated
  in the Western suburb of Schonau. This cotton spinning
  mill is also among the largest of its kind in Europe
  and the equipment includes 237,000 spimiles and
  2,270 doublers. The plant is reported to have an
  annual capacity for 30,000 bales of cotton. In 1938
  the company, which has a branch factory in Wolkenburg,
  was employing a total of some 2500 workers.

 Rubber and Tyres

  Zieger & Wigand A.G.   Alfred Kindler Str. (-)

  This firm, which before the war employed some 230
  workers, normally manufactures all types of surgical
  and medical rubberware.

  Vulkan Gummiwarenfabrik Weiss and Baessler A. G.  Leipzig-Lindenau (3) 

  Prior to the war 500 to 600 workers were employed
  in this factory in the manufacture of medical
  goods (including an important output of
  prophylactics) rubber gloves, hard rubber medical
  products, and mechanicals.

  Hans Werner, Vulcom-Pneu-Fabrik Leipzig (-)

  This is a government licensed re-treading
  concern with capacity to process 1,000 tyres
  per month including tractor, aero-, and motor tyres.


- 438 -

LETMATHE (Westphalia)
51° 21' N. 7° 28' E: 335 miles: (26,000)

 Letmathe, including its neighbouring town of Hohenlimburg,
lies at the South-eastern end of the Ruhr area 12 miles South
East of Dortmund and 7 miles East of Hagen. Both towns have a
considerable number of small firms engaged in light engineering,
and one or two larger firms listed below, which specialise in the
production of wire and springs for railway wagons, locomotives
and motor vehicles. Other products are metal bands and nails.

 Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

 Walter Voos      Letmathe   (3)
  Believed to be numbered among the more
  important cobalt refineries in Germany,
  this works has an estimated capacity of
  3,000 tons of cobalt p.a. It is unlikely
  to be working at anything approaching
  capacity,

 Engineering and Armaments

 Gustav Schnadt    Letmathe   (-)

  This fim has a small foundry and
  produces centrifugal casting machines.

 Döhner A.G.      Letmathe   (3)
  The firm of Stahl- u. Eisenwerke DÖhner
  A.G. has two works, one in Iserlohn and
  one in Letmathe. The plants comprise cold-
  rolling mills, hardening, tempering and
  tube works, and steel wire-drawing plant.
  Strip, band, and sheet metal is produced;
  also wire, machine-tool steel, moulds,
  tubes and other metal goods.

 Ver. Deutsche Nickel-Werke A.G, Letmathe    (3)
  The Letmathe branch of this firmis
  built on a site of 106,800 sq,. metres
  and comprises smelting and wire-drawing
  works, and sheet, rod and strip rolling
  mills. Semi-finished metal goods are
  manufactured.

 Alfred Löttes   Letmathe (-)
 Görke und Steins   Letmathe   -)
 Tossicke Kettenfabrik Letmathe -)

  The above are three of the more important
  metal works in Letmathe. They are engaged
  on precision wire-drawing, production of
  screws, and production of chains respective-
  ly. None of these factories is of individual
  importance.



- 439 -


 Hoesch A.G., Dortmund   Hohenlimburg (3)

  This branch of the Hoesch works
  consists of two separate plants
  in Oege and Nahm er, two Southern
  suburbs of Hohenlimburg At Oege,
  rolling mills and wire-drawing plant
  produce iron and steel sections,
  bands and wire; Nähmer has a cold-
  rolling mill.

 Wurag Eisen- u. Stahlwerke   Hohenlimburg (3)
  Owned by the Vereinigte Stahlwerke,
  Düsseldorf, this works has cold-
  rolling mills and a wire-drawing
  plant and is believed to employ some
  900 workers.



LEVERKUSEN (Rhineland)
51° N. 7° E: 310 miles:   (50,000)

 Leverkusen is on the right bank of the Rhine 5 miles
North of Köln. The industry is almost entirely concerned
with the large chemical works described below, which are
immediately to the South of Leverkusen and occupy an area
almost as large as the town itself.

 Public Utility Services

 Electric Power Station   Leverkusen (2)
  The thermal power station forms part
  of the chemical works of the I.G. Farben
  and has an installed capacity of 100 MW.
  The station supplies both electricity
  and steam to the works, which utilise
  the whole of the plant's production. It
  is not known whether the station is
  connected to the grid.

 Chemicals and Explosives

  I.G.Falbenindustrie A.G.    Leverkusen (1+)

  The Leverkusen Works of the I.G. concern
  ^ere formerly known as Friedrich Bayer
  & Co. and are still frequently referred .
  to as the Bayer Works. The plant, which
  is responsible for a high proportion of
  the total German production of a number
  of important chemical products, is of
  very considerable importance in the German
  chemical industry.



- 440 -
 

  One of its main activities is connected
  with the tableting and ampouling of
  pharmaceutical and medicinal preparations,
  serums and associated products. It is
  by far the largest tableting and ampouling
  works in Europe, and, apart from finishing
  medicinal and pharmaceutical preparations
  manufactured at the Leverkusen works, also
  undertakes the tableting and ampouling of
  practically the entire output of these
  products manufactured at Elberfeld, the
  largest German pharmaceutical plant, and
  Höchst.
  The heavy-chemical plant at Leverkusen
  consists primarily of the sulphuric-acid
  unit, which is estimated to have a capacity
  of   tons per year or roughly 11$ of
  the total German capacity. It is the largest
  German sulphuric-acid unit. The plant is
  also an important producer of electrolytic
  caustic soda and chlorine'
  Leverkusen is also one of the largest
  German factories making dyes and associated
  products. Anong other preparations made
  here on a large scale are film base, films,
  photographic paper, filters and photographic
  chemicals. The works includes a synthetic-
  rubber plant producing ”Perdurine” rubber,
  estimated to have a capacity of 4,000 tons
  per annum. Several, apparently reliable,
  reports indicate that toxic acids and smoke-
  producing compounds are prepared at Lever-
  kusen. It is probable that the filling process
  would be carried out in one of the several
  filling stations Situated within the Cologne
  area. Situated within the works is the plant
  of the Titanium G.m.b.H., one of the leading
  German producers of titanium pignents.
  It is believed that the Leverkusen works
  employs more than 20,000 people. The works,
  which extend for over one mile along the
  river front,occupies the whole area between
  the river and the North-to-South railway
  along the right bank of the Rhine, which
  here runs parallel with, and approximately
  1,100 yards from, the river. The works has
  extensive rail sidings, rail storage depots,
  and large harbour facilities.


- 441 -



 Dynamit A.G.     Schlebusch (2)
  This factoiy was of considerable importance
  in the last war. In 1918 it was one of the
  most important T. N. T. factories in Germany
  and produced more than 1,000 tons per month.
  It was one of the few factories permitted
  to continue the manufacture of T. N. T.
  under the Versailles Treaty and was produc-
  ing 294 tons monthly in 1923.
  Both ground reports and air photographs
  suggest that the factoiy has returned at
  least to its full former level of activity,
  and certain extensions appear to have been
  made. The factory has not only its own
  nitric-acid plant (as is common practice
  in large explosives factories), but also its
  own sulphuric-acid plant using the contact
  process, which is unusual. It is apparent
  that T. N. T. is still the chi© product of
  the plant, capacity being probably about
  15,000 tons per annum. It is clear that
  other explosives are also made at Schlebusch
  but it is not certain what these are. It
  almost certainly has plant for the manufacture
  of nitroglycerine, which may now be used for
  the production of diglycoldinitrate. In the
  last war the factoiy produced a small quantity
  of hexanitrodiphenyl-sulphide, and although
  this explosive does not now appear to be used
  by the German forces the plant would be suit-
  able for the manufacture of hexanitrodiphenylamine.




LIEGNITZ (Silesia)
51° 15' N. 16° 10' E: 700 miles: (78,000)

 Liegnitz is in Lower Silesia, 40 miles West of Breslau
on the main line from Berlin. It is a Junction for four branch
lines and is the centre of a large agricultural district. There
is a considerable textile industly, and several engineering works
one of which has been expanded during the war and is described
below.

 Transportation

 Railway Repair Shops   Liegnitz   (3)
  These are medium-sized repair shops
  which undertake the repair of goods
  wagons.

 Public Utility Services

 Municipal Gasworks    Liegnitz   (3)
  In 1936 the municipal gasworks made
  220 million cubic feet of gas.


- 442 -



 Engineering and Armaments

  HenriettenhfLtte     Liegnitz   (3)
   The steel works in Liegnitz known as the
   Henriettenhdtte and Dorotheenhtltte were,
   prior to the war, small foundries producing
   batha, water pipes, and other castings. It
   has been reported that these works have now
   been considerably extended and that a white-
   metal foundry has been added, together with
   plant for the working and finishing of
   metal components. 2500 workers are believed
   to be employed, and the products include
   components for aero-engines and for tanks,
   in addition to shell forgings.

  Teichert       Liegnitz   (-)

   The Liegnitzer Eisengiesserei &. Maschinenfabrik
   Teichert & Sohn manufacture many types of
   wood-working machinery, and employed some
   600 workers in 1939.

 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

  Mercur      Liegnitz   (-)

   The Wollwarenfabrik Mercur is the largest
   of several textile mills in Liegnitz.
   Approximately 1,000 workers were employed
   in 1937. The products included many kinds
   of wool, cotton, silk and rayon goods.



LIMBACH (Saxony)
50° 50' N. 12° 45' E: 560 miles: (18,000)

  Limbach is situated on a branch line 6 miles to the West of
Chemnitz. It is the centre of a district which was formerly well-
known for local hand knitted and woven products. This industry,
which was spread over a number of small towns in the neighbourhood
has now been modernised. Knitted and fabric gloves are among the
specialities. None of the firms is of importance.


- 443 -


LIMBURG (Hesse-Nassau)
50° 25' N. 8° E: 380 miles: (12,000)

 Limburg is on the river Lahn which flows into the Rhine
opposite Koblenz, 15 miles West of Limburg. It is on the
railway from G-iessen to Koblenz and is the junction for- several
minor branch lines serving the Nassau district of the province
of Hessen-Nassau. It is mainly an agricultural market centre
and its industries are not of great importance.

 Transportation

 Railway Repair Shops    Limburg   (3)


  The Limburg railway workshops undertake
  repairs of locomotives, passenger coaches,
  and goods wagons and employ approximately
  1,000 workers.



LINDAU (Bavaria)
47° 35' N. 9° 40' E: 520 miles: (15,000)


 Lindau is on the bank of Lake Constance, and is the main port
for the ferry services which cross the lake to Switzerland. It is the
teiminus for a main railway line leading from Munich and Augsburg.
Apart from the Dornier aircraft works mentioned below, Lindau has no
industry of importance.

 Aircraft and Aero-Engines

 Dornier      Rickenbach (3)

  The Dornier Werke G-.m.b.H. have established
  an airframe component factory near Rickenbach
  which is 5 miles to the East of Lindau and
  are reported to employ 3,000 workers here.
  The prFoducts are believed to include various
  light,-metal sheet components, steering gear,
  etc. and are supplied to the Löwenthal and
  Manzell plants.



LIPPSTADT (Westphalia)
51° 40' N. 8° 20' E: 365 miles: (21,000)


 Lippstadt is 15 miles East of Hamm on a main railway line which
leads from Saxony and Eastern Germany to ths Rhineland. It is a
junction for several minor branch lines. The town has several
engineering firms, the most important of which are mentioned below.



- 444 -


 Engineering and Armaments

Ver. Stahlwerke A.G.   Lippstadt  (2)
  These branch works of the Ver. St ahi werke
  A.G. employ seme 5500 workers, and make
  bodies for bombs, shells, and torpedoes.
  They are also reported to be producing
  gun barrels. It is believed that these
  works are the former Dornheim AₐG.
  of Lippstadt.

Westfälische Union A.G.    Lippstadt  (2)
  The Lippstadt branch works of the Westfälische
  Union A.G. is a wire-drawing plant at present
  engaged largely in the production of barbed
  wire. Their other products include wire cables,
  wire gauze, and nails. Westfälische Union
  belongs to the Ver. Stahlwerke A.G., and have
  several works in other towns of Western Germany.
  They specialise, among other things, in welding
  electrodes, and the Lippstadt'works is believed
  to account for approximately 20^ of the total
  German output.

Metallindustrie    Lippstadt  (2)
  The Westfälische Metallindustrie A.G. are
  makers of fuies, detonators, S.A.A., and
  torpedo components. They are believed to
  employ some 2500 workers.




LÖBAU (Saxony)
51° 5' N. 14° 40' E: 640 miles: (15,000)

 Löbau is in the Eastern area of Saxony, 15 miles South-east
of Bautzen. There are a variety of industries^ including spinning
and weaving mills, dyeworks, and makers of agricultural machinery.
The factories are all on a small scale,



LÖRRACH (Baden)
47° 35' N. 7° 40' E: 440 miles: (21,000)

 Lörrach is in the foothills of the Black Forest, close to the
Swiss frontier, and within 5 miles of Basle. There are several
minor textile firms making silk goods and sewing silks, a chocolate
factory belonging to N.stle, and a number of small engineering and
.metal-working factories. None is of importance.

- 445 -

LÜBECK (Schleswig-Holstein)
53° 50' N. 10° 40' E: 480 miles: (133,000)

 The Baltic port of Lübeck, which has assumed considerable
importance as a base for the supply of the Eastern Front and the
forces in Norway and Denmark, and is also a submarine building
centre, is 30 miles North-east of Hamburg. Lübeck is the terminus
of the Elbe-Trave Canal which connects with the Elbe and Germany's
extensive inland-waterways system, and provides direct communication
with Berlin and Hamburg, In recent years Lübeck has grown in
importance as an industrial transport and trading centre owing to
the expansion of the Lübecker Flenderwerke Ä.G-. where submarines
and small merchant vessels are built, the construction of a large
aircraft-component works, and the enlarging and modernising of the
harbour and transport facilities. The Elbe-Trave canal joins the
River Trave some 2 miles to the South West of Lübeck. The river
Trave breaks into several channels which completely enclose the old
inner town. It then flows Northwards for a few miles, turns East
and enters the sea at Travemünde, which contains a seaplane base
and is also the terminus of a ferry route to Denmark, The industries
lie chiefly to the North and West of the town, the residential
areas to the South and East. Included in the town's administrative
area is the suburb of Schlutup.

 Transportation

 Inland Port      Lübeck  (2)
  The port area of Lübeck extends from the
  town centre to the large Industriehafen on
  the left bank of the Trave one mile to the
  North. The three aims of the river, which
  surround the island on which the central
  part of Lübeck is built, are used as docks
  as are also the banks of the Trave to the
  North of the town. Railway sidings, warehouses
  and loading facilities are provided for all
  these various docks and quays and for the
  Industriehafen, which is a basin measuring
  1000 yards by 200 yards.

 Public Utility Services

 Power Station     Siems   (2)
  It is believed that tnis station is
  owned by the Nordwestdeutsche Kraftwerk
  A.G., controlled by the Preussische
  Elektrizitäts A.G. It has been built
  since the outbreak of war and very little
  information about it is available. It is
  situated on the River Trave about 5 miles
  North of IZfbeck and about lg miles upstream
  from the older station at Herrenwyk. It
  has an estimated installed capacity of 80MW
  and there is good reason to think that a
  double circuit 110 kV connects it to the
  Niendorf Substation, South-west of Lübeck
  and also that the station is connected to
  lübeck and district, to Hamburg by long-
  distance line, and to the generating
  station at Herrenwyk.



- 446 -



  Power Station    Herrenwyk  (2)
  This thermal generating station lies
  2 miles to the East of the Siems station.
  It has an installed capacity of 28 MW.
  It is connected to the substation at
  Schlutup and believed to be connected
  to the generating station at Siems.

 Substation      Niendorf   (3)

  This is a tertiary substation to the
  South-West of the town of Lübeck and
  is connected to the Siems generating
  Station, probably by 110 kV line.



 Hochofenwerk Coking Plant   Herrenwyk  (3)
  This plant, on the site of the Hochofenwerk
  Lübeck A.G-. steel works, has 203 ovens
  and a maximum est'd dry coal capacity of
  477,000 tons per annum.

 Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys

 Hochofenwerk Lübeck A.G-.   Herrenwyk  (3)
  The Hochofenwerk Lubeck A.G-. is situated
  in the North-easter' Suburb of Herrenwyk.
  The Htittenabteilung includes 3 blast
  furnaces and an ammonia and benzol plant.
  This company has a branch factory in
  Stettin, and in 1938 employed in the
  two plants a total of some 2,700 workers.

 Aircraft and Aero-Engines

 Dornier-Werke     Curt Helm Str. (2)
  The Norddeutsche Dornier Werke G. m.b.H,
  are a subsidiary company of the main
  Dornier concern. They have factories
  in Berlin - Reinickendorf, Wismar and
  Lübeck. The Lubeck branch was formerly
  the Leichtkonstruktion Lubeck G.m.b.H.
  and is thought to have been taken over
  by the Dornier company in the summer
  of 1938. In 1940 this plant was reported
  to employ some 3,000 workers, and it is
  said to be producing components and
  fuselages for the assembly factory at
  Wismar.

 Shipbuilding (See also under E. and A.)

 Elende rwerke     Herrenwyk  (1)

  The lübecker Flenderwerke A.G. are
  situated in the North-eastern suburb of
  Herrenwyk. The yard has extensive


- 447 -


 Flenderwerke (-)
   facilities including 5 large slips,
   between 4&0 and 520 feet in length.
   It normally builds merchant ships of
   medium tonnage, and also floating docks,
   locks, pontoons etc. Since the war the
   yard has worked mainly on 500-ton U-boats,
   but a number of 600-ton. mine-sweepers
   have also been built. Three floating
   docks, 310 - 530 feet in length are
   available and a great deal of repair
   work is done. In September 1943, 16
   U-boats were reported under con-
   struction and fitting out. The
   FlerkLerwerke also have an important
   structural steelwork and bridging
   department,

 Engineering and Armaments

 Dragerwerke       St.Lorenz-SucL (2)
   The Dragerwerke, which are situated in
   the Western suburb of St.Lorenz-Sud,
   are manufacturers of under-water
   diving and escape apparatus, service
   respirators, life-saving appliances,
   oxygen breathing and regulating
   apparatus, air life-jackets for
   airmen, and welding and cutting
   installations. In 1938 the plant
   employed some 2,000 workers.

 Maschinenbau Gesellschaft    Karlstr.  (2)
   The Lübecker Maschinenbau Gesellschaft
   is a subsidiary company of Orenstein &
   Koppel A.G. It employs some 3,000
   workers on the manufacture of all
   types of dredging and excavating
   machinery. The works are on the Eastern
   side of the Wallhafen, and are served by
   rail sidings. They include a shipyard
   with three small slips (up to 280 feet
   in length)
where merchant vessels up to
   3,000 tons gross, as well as dredges,
   floating cranes, and tugs are built.
   Their special wartime construction
   includes 600-ton minesweepers and escort
   vessels.



- 448 -



  Maschinenfabrik E:Bergbaus  Umschlaghafen (2)
   The Berliner-Lübecker Maschinenfabrik
   Bernhard Berghaus is situated in the
   Umschlaghafen, which lies to the North
   of the town. It is reported to employ
   several thousand workers on the
   manufacture of rifles and light
   machine guns.

  Maschinenfabrik Beth A.G.   Kanalhafen (-)

   These works are situated to the North
  of the town. They are engaged on the
  manufacture of machinery for dust
  elimination and recovery in factories,
  and employed some 350'workers in
   ' 1938.

  "Lubecawerke” G.m.b.H.    Glashüttenweg (-)

   This firmis engaged on the
   manufacture of machinery for the
   tin plate and canning industry.

  D. W. M.     Schlutup  (3)
   The parent works of the Deutsche
   Waffen- und Munitionfabriken A.G.
   are in Berlin. The Lubeck branch is
   situated in a large wood near the
   North-eastern suburb of Schlutup.
   Recent reports suggest that the plant
   is producing shells of various calibres
   and has a total of 2,000 employees of
   several nationalities.

 Chemicals and Explosives

  Guano-Werke      Danischburg (-)

   This firm, whose parent works are
   in Hamburg, has a branch factory in the
   suburb of Danischburg. It lies to
   the North of the town on the left bank
   of the river Trave. The plant, which
   has its owi quay and loading facilities,
   employs some 450'workers on the
   manufacture of sulphuric acid and
   superphosphates.


- 449 -

LUCKENWALDE (Brandenburg)
52° 5' N. 13° 10' E: 570 miles: (35,000)

   Luckenwalde is 30 miles South of Berlin on the main
 -railway line to Juterbog where the line divides, one
 branch leading to Halle and Leipzig, and the other to
 Dresden. The industries include cloth mills and
 several engineering firms. In peacetime luckenwalde
 was well known for the manufacture of pianos,
 furniture, and metal fittings.

 Engineering and Armaments

   Richard Matzke    luckenwalde (-)

   The Luckenwalder Schraubenfabrik Richard
   Matzke is one of several factories in this
   town which produce nuts, bolts and screws.

   A.Bartosik & Co.     Luckenwalde (-)

   This firm specialises in peacetime in
   metal fittings for furniture and is now
   reported to be making parts (including
   recoil springs) for A. A. and machine guns.

 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

   C. W. Fahndrioh    Luckenwalde  (-)

   These cloth manufacturers have the largest
   Of several textile mills in this neighbourhood
   and are believed to be important producers
   of uniform cloth.



LÜDENSCHEID (Westphalia)
51° 15' N. 7° 55' E: 555 miles: (40,000)

   Lüdenscheid is in the Sauerland, a hilly district of South
 Western Westphalia, for which it serves as a tourist centre. It
 lies near to the valley of the River Lenne, and like all the
 numerous settlements in this district, has a large number of metal-
 working establishments. There are over 500 such factories in
 Lüdenscheid, employing a total of some 10,000 workers. Small items
 of military equipment are among the products, which also include
 cutlery and small kitchen utensils, buttons, pins, and similar
 metal goods. Three firms mentioned below are given as examples.

 Engineering and Armaments

   Württembergische Metallwaren Fabrik A.G-. (3)

   Ver. Deutsche Metallwerke A.G-.     (3)

   Metallwerke Max Kamper A.G-.   (3)

   The above are three of a very large number
   of light-engineering works, brass foundries,
   And metal fitting manufacturers in Lüdenscheid.


- 450 -


LUDWIGSBURG (Württemberg)
48° 55' N. 9° 10' E: 450 miles: (40,000)



 Ludwigsburg is 6 miles North of Stuttgart and was formerly a
residence of the Kings of Württemberg. It is immediately North of
Kornwestheim which is dealt with separately, Ludwigsburg is mainly
a residential town but there are a number of small scale industries,
some of which have been developed during the war. The thermal power
station at Marbach (in the Neckar valley)
and the Stuttgart power
station are described under the heading "Stuttgart".

 Engineering and Armaments


 Beru-Werk       Ludwigsburg (3)
   The Beru-Werk Albert Ruprecht are makers
   of automobile components, in particular
   of sparking plugs and ignition units.

 Zahnradfabrik       Solitudeallee (-)

   The Get rag Getriebe & Zahnradfabrik A.G.
   are makers of gear boxes, cogwheels and
   other automobile components. Before
   the war they employed some 200 workers.

 Excelsior       Ludwigsburg (-)

   The Excelsior Maschinenbauges, Dr. 0. Schneider
   are makers of sifting and washing machinery
   for sand, gravel and mineral ores.

 Ziemann        Ludwigsburg' (-)

   The A.Ziemann A.G. are makers of machinery,
   in particular for the brewing and chemical
   industries, and of aluminium tanks and cooling
   apparatus. Their works were formerly in'
   Stuttgart but in 1936 they moved into new
   factory premises in Ludwigsburg. They - employed
   some 250'workers before the war.

 Armaments Factory     Ludwigsburg (-)

   It has been reported that a large factory for
   the assembly of small arms has been established
   in the North West of the town near to the group
   of four barracks.



LUDWIGSHAFEN (Bavaria)
49° 30' N. 8° 50' E:  400 miles: (150,000)

 Ludwigshafen, which is on the left bank of the Rhine opposite
Mannheim, and the largest town in the Bavarian Palatinate, is dealt
with under the heading "Mannheim".

- 451 -

LÜNEBURG (Hannover)
53° 15' N. 10° 25' E:   460 miles:  (32,000)

 Luneburg is 30 miles South-east of Hamburg, and on the Northern
edge of the Luneburger Heide. It is on the main line from Hamburg
to Hannover, and is the junction for five branch lines of local
importance. In former times Luneburg -was a large supplier of salt,
and it is now a health resort which is visited largely for its brine
baths. The Luneburger Heide has been developed into an important
agricultural district, and Luneburg is one of the principal market
towns. There are chemical works, one of which is mentioned below,
and a variety of woodworking factories making furniture, barrels,
parquet flooring, and similar products.

 Transportation

 Railway Repair Shops      Lüneburg (3)
   These are medium sized repair shops undertaking
   the repair of goods wagons.

 Chemicals and Explosives

 Saline Lüneburg        Neue Sülze (-)

   The Saline Luneburg & Chemische- Fabrik A. G.
   employed some 300 workers before the war, and
   produced soda, rock and table salt, and lime
   fertilisers.



    LÜNEN (Westphalia)
   See under ttortmunä

LUNOW (Brandenburg)
52° 55' N. 14° 5' E:  610 miles:  (1500)

  Lunow is 8 miles South-east of Angermunde and 40 miles
North-east of Berlin. It is on the left bank of the river Oder
and has no importance apart from the Explosives factory mentioned
below.

 Chemicals and Explosives

 Dynamit A. G.       Lunow (3)
   This factory was apparently under construction at
   the beginning of the war and has certainly been
   greatly enlarged since. There is very little
   ground information concerning its activities, but
   it appears to be important. Unfortunately the
   only air reconnaissance of the region has provided
   no more than a photograph of a small corner of the
   explosives factory in which are some storage sheds.
   The size of these does not contradict the impression
   that the factory itself is not of considerable size.

   It is fairly definitely established that penthrite is
   made in this factory, and it was reported in 1940 that
   plant for the production of a new explosive for



- 452 -



   torpedoes and bombs had gone into
   production. The nature of this
   new explosive is uncertain, but
   it may be hexanitrodipheuylamine
   (which is commonly used in German
   torpedoes and mines), or it may
   be hexogen. It is significant
   that the site of manufacture of
   hexogen in Germany has not been
   positively identified, although
   this explosive is now used by
   the German forces.

   The factory is reported to be
   opened by Dynamit A. G , but
   its ownership has not been
   confirmed. It lies 4 kms. from
   Luniw on the west bank of the
   river Oder.

    LÜTTRINGHAUSEN (Rhineland)
   See under Remscheid.


LYCK (East Prussia)
53° 50' N. 22° 20' E: 955 miles: (16,000)

  lyck is in the South Eastern portion of East Prussia,
within 10 miles of the Polish border. .It is an agricultural
centre with horse and cattle markets, and has no industries
of importance. It is on a railway line leading from
Konigsberg to Bialystok in Poland, and is a Junction for
three branch lines serving the South Eastern district of
East Prussia.


- 453 -

MAGDEBURG (province Saxony)
52° 10' N. 11° 40' E: 500 miles:  (320,000)

  Magdeburg is the largest town in the Prussian Province of Saxony,
and contains heavy and general engineering works of the first order,
aero-engine works, an explosives factory, and a large synthetic-oil
plant. Its position on the River Elbe and on one of the main North
to South trade routes of Europe has given it from the earliest times
a commercial and industrial importance which it has maintained up to
the present day. It is one of the principal traffic centres of Central
Germany, and has a railway junction which is second only to Berlin
itself with lines radiating N. to Hamburg and Rostock, E. to Berlin
and the Baltic ports, S.E. to Leipzig and Czechoslovakia, S. to
Halle, Nürnberg and Munich, and W. to Hanover and the Ruhr. The
central German Leipzig-Magdeburg lines have been electrified. The
main part of the town is on the left bank of the Elbe, and is a
closely built-up area. Industries and groups of industries are
situated round most of the town's perimeter. One important group
is at Neustadt and Rothensee, on the northern outskirts, but the
Grusonwerk of Krupps, which occupies the first place in Magdeburg's
industries, is in Buckau, the southern portion of the town.

  There are large marshalling and goods yards both in Rothensee and
in Buckau. The Western quarter of the town, which is known as the
Wilhelmstadt, and the Eastern suburb of Friedrichstadt, which is on
the right bank of the Elbe, contain groups of industries. The Elbe
divides into two channels, forming an island which lies between
Magdeburg and Friedrichstadt. This island is itself intersected by
a third .narrow river channel (the Zoll Elbe)
and contains an inland
harbour, with warehouses and storage depots.

  The Mittelland Canal follows an E. -W. course 6 miles N. of the
town, but this important waterways route is broken where it should
be carried over the Elbe, due to the failure to complete the
aqueduct, and also by the double ship lift at Hohenwarthe mile to
the east of the aqueduct. Barges therefore have to negotiate the
40-60 ft. change in level to the river by the Rothensee shiplift,
pass down the N. -S, branch canal into the Elbe, and rejoin the
Ihle section of the canal by the locks at Niegripp, a distance of
some 8 miles by water from the Rothensee shiplift.

  The town of Schönebeck, 9 miles to the South of Magdeburg,
where there are aircraft, ammunition, and chemical factories, is
dealt with separately.

  Transportation

Inland Harbour Magdeburg (2)
  Magdeburg has extensive inland harbour facilities
  for the Elbe traffic. The Handelshafen and the
  Industriehafen, the two largest docks, are at the
  Northern end of the town close to the industrial areas
  of Neustadt and Rothensee. There are several smaller
  docks and loading basins further downstream at Rothensee
  and connected with the Weser-Elbe Canal by the N. -S.
  branch canal and the Rothensee shiplift. This is part of
  the Mittelland Kanal system, which is continued Eastward
  from the Elbe to link up with the Oder. There is a further
  large dock known as the Zollhafen on the island formed by
  the two arms of the Elbe between Magdeburg and the suburb
  of Friedrichstadt. Magdeburg hamiles up to 2 million tons
  of waterborne goods per annum, including grain, sugar beet,
  vegetables, coal and timber.


- 454 -

 

  The shiplift is situated at the top of the N. -S.
  branch canal dose to its junction with the Mittolland
  canal; it can lift or lower barges up to 1,000 tons to
  the maximum of 60 ft. required by the level of the Elbe.

  Railway Junction    Magdeburg   (3)

  The main line from Hamburg to Halle and Saxony
  passes through Magdeburg from North to South.
  One of the principal routes from Berlin to the
  Lower Rhineland crosses the Elbe at Rothensee
  and continues westwards from Magdeburg to Brunswick.
  Five other important branch lines radiate from
  Magdeburg. The railway junctions are in the
  Rothensee area and to the South of the main railway
  station.

  Marshalling Yard and Repair shops Buckau     (2)
  The Buckau marshalling yard is the most important in
  Magdeburg, and has capacity for handling 3,800 wagons
  per 24 hours. It extends for 2 miles to the S. of
  the town. There is a large loco, depot and loco repair
  shops which are possibly only partly active.
  
  Marshalling Yards     Rothensee   (3)
  These extensive marshalling yards are close to
  the Industriehafen and to the junction of the lines
  from Berlin and Hamburg. They have a capacity for
  3,000 wagons per 24 hours.

  Goods Station     Magdeburg   (3)
  The main goods station, which includes a number
  of large storage depots, is immediately South of
  the main railway station in the centre of the town.

  Railway Repair Shops    Salbke    (3)
  These large and well-equipped repair shops are
  believed to employ some 2500 workers, and undertake
  repairs and maintenance of all kinds of railway
  rolling stock. They are in the South Eastern suburb
  of Salbke, and close to the works of the R. Wolf A. G.

 Public Utility Services
 
  Power Station'Mikramag'   Rothensee   (1)  
  This thermal power station is situated N. of the
  Industriehafen on the N. -S. branch canal of the
  Mittelland Canal. Its installed capacity is at least
  130 MW and it is designed for expansion to at least
  200 MW. The station supplies steam and electricity to
  the adjacent synthetic-oil plant referred to below under
  Liquid Fuels the estimated requirements of which are
  100 MW, and to the nearby electrolytic zinc works (estimated
  requirements 35 MW and 25 tons/hr steam), referred to below
  under Non-ferrous Metals. Electricity is also supplied to
  the city of Leipzig. One 110 kV long-distance transmission
  line connects to the sub-station at Buckau S. of the town,
  and via that sub-station to the sub-station at Diesdorf,
  referred to below.


- 455 -


  Süb-station      Diesdorf  (3)
  This sub-station is situated 2 miles W. of Magdeburg
  and is probably owned by jreussenelektra. It is
  on the 220-kV line linking the Ruhr-Westphalian area
  with Berlin and is the junction point for several lines
  connecting to the brown-coal-field stations in the
  Leipzig area. 110 kV lines connect to Förderstadt, Golpa, Mikramag
  via Buckau, and Brandenburg.
  
  Gasworks        Rothensee   (2)
  The Grossgaserei Mitteldeutschland A.G. , which
  belongs to the Deutsche Continental-Gas—gesellschaft,
  owns a large gasworks at Rothensee which supplies the
  local long-distance gas system, including the town of
  Magdeburg and Aschersleben, Köthen and Halberstadt.
  The plant has 160 ovens having an estimated dry-coal
  capacity of 870,000 tons per annum. The works include
  a tar-distillation plant. The largest of the gasholders
  has a capacity of 100,000 cu.m. In 1936 the works made
  2,100 million cubic feet of gas.

  Gasworks        Magdeburg   (3)
  The municipal gasworks at Magdeburg buys the bulk
  of its gas from Rothensee, but also makes water gas
  on its own works. Total sales in 1936 were 1,050
  million cu. ft.

  Gasworks        Magdeburg-Sftdost (-)

  This small works, owned by the Gas-und Stromversorgun
  Magdeburg Sftdost A.G' , buys gas for re-sale from the
  local grid.

 Liquid Fuels and Substitutes

  Braunkohle-Benzin A.G,     Magdeburg   (2)
  One mile to the North-east of the Rothensee
  marshalling yards is the large synthetic-oil
  plant of the Braunkohle-Benzin A.G. , operated
  by the Bergius process for hydrogenating brown-
  coal tar. These works have been much enlarged
  during the war, and are estimated to have attained
  a capacity of 250,000 tons per annum. Further
  expansions are still being carried out.

  Oil Storage      Neustadt  (-)

  Between the Handelshafen and the Industriehafen, and
  close to the Rothensee marshalling yards, are large
  petroleum stores. Seven large and four smaller tanks,
  occupying an area of some 50,000 sq. yds. , are estimated
  to have a storage capacity for 50,000 tons. There is a
  smaller group of storage tanks on the Eastern side of the
  Industriehafen.

- 456 -


 Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

  G. von Giesches Erben     Rothensee   (2)
  The non-ferrous metal works of Georg von Giesches
  Erben include a zinc smelting plant, and produce
  zinc alloys, sulphuric acid, and electrolytic
  cadmium. The output is believed to be approximately
  60,000 tons of zinc, 65,000 tons of sulphuric acid,
  and 180 tons of electrolytic cadmium per annum. The
  production of this plant was originally calculated
  for 200,000 tons of zinc annually, with possibilities
  for expansion to twice this amount. Some 800 workers
  were employed in 1938. The principal sources of raw
  materials are the Georg von Giesches Bleischarley mines
  in Beuthen. The works have their own loading quays on
  the Elbe, and are adjacent to the Mikramag electric
  power station.

 Aircraft and Aero-Engines

  Junkers        Rothensee   (1+)

  These large aero-engine works are nearly equal
  in importance to the Junkers engine works at KBthen,
  in point of production capacity, but in addition
  have special departments for airscrews and fuel-
  injection pumps. The number of workers employed is
  believed to exceed 15,000, including a high proportion
  of foreign labour.
  Aero-engines of the Jumo 211 type have been the primary
  product of these works. Since the beginning of the war
  V. D.M.-type propellers have been made in considerable
  quantities from rough blade forgings supplied from out-
  side. The works occupy a large area (approximately
  190,000 sq. yds.) in the Neustadt quarter of the town,
  within half a mile of the Rothensee marshalling yards.
  They include the plant of the Magdeburger Werkzeug-
  maschinenfabrik which has for many years been a
  subsidiary of Junkers.

 Engineering and Armaments

  Krupp-Grusonwerk      Buckau   (1+)

  The highly important works of the Friedrich Krupp
  Grusonwerk A.G. are in Buckau, the Southern quarter
  of Magdeburg, where they occupy an area of approx-
  imately 900,000 sq. yards. They include a large
  steel plant with open-hearth furnaces and Bessemer
  converters, foundries, forges, pressing plant, and
  rolling mills. They produce armour plating, bow
  castings for submarines, heavy anchors and chains,
  and specialise in drilled castings. The machine
  shops cover a wide range of heavy machinery - for
  crushing, ore dressing, grinding, cement making,
  etc. ; cranes and conveyors are also made. According
  to reports the armaments produced include A.A. guns,
  gun mountings, and heavy naval shells. They are
  the main tank assembly plant for the 23-ton PZ. Kpf
  u. IV. , being supplied with certain components by
  Krupp, Essen.


- 457 -



  These works were already employing at least 10,000
  workers before the war, and it is believed that this
  number may now have increased to as many as 35,000.
  In addition to the heavy steel and engineering plant,
  the Grusonwerk undertake various types of lighter
  engineering work, and have one section which
  manufactures gear—wheels of all types and sizes.


  Schaeffer und Budenberg    Schönebeckerstr. (2)
  The Schaeffer & Budenberg G.m.b.H. , whose works
  are in the suburb of Buckau, are important
  specialists in measuring instruments, gauges of all
  kinds, valves, pumps, injectors, and signalling
  installations. They employ some 1,600 workers.
  The works include a large steel foundry with electric
  arc furnaces. It is reported that this firmis now
  producing torpedo components, including engines and
  generators, gyros, and depth setting gear.

  Polte       poltestr.   (1)
  The Polte Armaturen & Maschinenfabrik are in the
  Northern part of the town. These works have been
  reported as now employing more than 10,000 workers.
  Originally makers of S.A.A. and shells, they appear
  to have extended their activity to include guns of
  light and heavy calibre, including railway guns and
  new types of extreme range large-calibre guns. A
  variety of machine tools, valves, pipe fittings, etc.,
  are also made.

  R. Wolf A. Gw       Buckau  (2)
  R. Wolf A. Gw       Salbke  2)
  The two separate works of the Maschinenfabrik Buckau
  R.Wolf A.G. are situated about half a mile apart in
  the Southern quarter of Magdeburg, The Buckau works
  normally produce complete plants and heavy machinery
  for briquetting works, and limestone quarrying, coal
  elevators, dredging plant, and similar equipment.
  They may also be machining and assembling gun barrels,
  breeches, etc.
  The Salbke works specialise in peacetime in boilers,
  complete steam power installations, diesel engines,
  locomobiles, tractors and pumps. It has been reported
  that this firmis now largely engaged on naval work,
  in particular the machining and assembly of the air
  vessel and water bottles for air-driven torpedoes,
  R.Wolf are also the leading German builders of
  locomobiles for industrial use, and this department
  is reported to be having to sub-contract outside
  firms. Some 8,000 workers are believed to be employed
  at the two plants.

  Otto Gruson & Co. K.G'     Buckau  (3)

  This firmis a subsidiary of Maschinenfabrik
  Buckau Wolf A.G. It is situated between the latter
  firm and the Buckau marshalling yard on the opposite
  side of the railway to Fried. Krupp Grusonwerk.
  The works includes a foundry of considerable size,
  and supplies gears and other components for A.F.V's
  as well as structural steel. It is known to have
  been manufacturing mine, bomb and shell cases,
  bow castings for U-boats, anchors and chains.




- 458 -



 Mumiles A.G.     Lübeckerstr.  (3)
  This firm normally makes sewing machines.
  The factory is in the Northern quarter of the
  town , and is now believed to be making smai 1 -arms
  and machine-gun components. Some 1500 workers
  are employed,

 Strube      Porsestr.   (3)
  The Maschinen & Armaturenfabrik vorm. C. Louis
  Strube A.G, are general engineers. Their products
  include valves and injection pumps. The works are
  close to those of Schaeffer & Budenberg. Approximately
  1 ,000 workers were employed before the war,

 Gelbke & Jaritz    Reichpr&sidentenstr, (3)
  This firm of coachbuilders is now believed to
  be an important M.T. repair works.

 Chemicals and Explosives

 Fahlberg & List    Alt Salbke   (2)
  The Fahlberg & List A.G. Chemische Fabriken
  are makers of superphosphates and other
  chemical fertilisers, explosives, including
  refined toluol and T, N. T. , saccharine, dyes,
  and sulphuric acid. The capacity of the
  sulphuric acid plant is believed to be 20,000
  t,p.a. Their works are on the left bank
  of the Elbe in the Southern quarter of
  Magdeburg, Approximately 4,000 workers are
  reported to be employed,

 Thos. Goldschmidt A. G.    Magdeburg-Buckau (3)
  (reported to be formerly Ghem Fab. Buskau A.G. )
  Producers of sulphuric acid. Their output is
  estimated to have been 55,000 tons per annum.
  In 1958, 760 men were then employed.

 Foodstuffs

 Hubbe Farenholtz   Reichprasidentenstr, (3)
  The vegetable-oil refinery of the Ver. Oelfabriken
  Hubbe & Farenholtz is in the suburb of Friedrichstadt
  on the right bank of the Elbe. There have been extensions
  to these premises during the war, and indications that
  the purpose of the oil-storage tanks may have been
  changed. Before the war the plant had an oilseed crushing
  capacity of 46,000 t. p, a.

 Grain Silos      Handelshafen (-)

  A number of grain warehouses, with a total storage
  capacity of 25,000 tons, are grouped round the
  Handelshafen,



- 459 -

MAINZ (Hesse)
50° N. 8° 15' E: 380 miles:   (145,000)

 Mainz is on the left bank of the Rhine oppssite the junction of
the River Main with the mainstream. It is on the main North to South
railway line which follows the Rhine valley from Holland to
Switzerland and is an important railway centre. Two main-line
railway bridges cross the Rhine at Mainz and lead to Prankfort/Main
and to Mannheim. The town has an inland harbour and is one of the
largest transhipment centres on the'Upper Rhine. The industries of
Mainz include engineering, wagon building, and shipbuilding. The
town is the principal centre of the Rhine wine trade and of the
German champagne industry.

 Transportation

 Inland Harbour    Mainz    (3)
  There are two large inland harbours at the
  Western end of the town and several smaller
  docks and quays at the junction of the Neckar
  with the Rhine in the suburb of G-ustavsburg
  opposite to Mainz, The pre-war tonnage handled
  in the port amounted to some 2 million tons per
  annum, largely grain, of which Mainz handled more
  than any other Upper Rhine port. There are three
  grain silos and many warehouses in the inland dock
  area. A small lying-up dock for the Rhine barges
  is at the Eastern end of the town.

 Railway Junction     Mainz    (3)
  Three important railway lines meet in the Western
  part, of the town. The main north to South railway
  along the left bank of the Rhine is here joined by
  the railway which crosses the Rhine by the Kais er-
  brücke (the Western railway bridge) and links Mainz
  with the right-bank railway route, and by a branch
  line from Alzey and the district of Rhine Hessen.
  The main line crosses the Rhine to the East of the
  town, beyond the mouth of the River Main, by the
  upper railway bridge.

 Marshalling Yards.    Bischofsheim (3)
  The outlying suburb of Bischofsheimis on
  the right bank of the Rhine near to the
  Eastern or Obere Rheinbrücke, on which the
  main line crosses the river. There are marshalling
  yards here which have a capacity of 3,200 wagons
  per 24 hours.




- 460 -




 Public Utility Services

 Electric Power Station Mainz (3)
   The Mainz electric power station, which has
  a capacity of 45 W. and is of the thermal
  type, is at the Western end of the town on the
  left bank of the Rhine'

 StÄdt. Gaswerk    Mainz

 StÄdt. Gaswerk    Mainz-Cronsanskim (-)

   In 1936, the two Mainz municipal gasworks
  purchased 810 million cubic feet of gas from
  the company named below, for re-sale.

 Kraftwerke Mainz-Wiesbaden A.G'  Mainz    (3)
   In 1936, this gasworks made and sold 1, 310
  million cubic feet of gas.

 Shipbuilding

 Schiffswerft     Gustavsburg (3)
  Christof Ruthof    Amöneburg (3)


   The Schiffswerft & Maschinenfabrik Gm.b.H,
  have their works on the right bank of the Main
  near to its Junction with the Rhine.
   The works of Christof Ruthof are on the right
  bank of the Rhine in the suburb of Amöneburg
  ' at the Northern end of the Kaiserbrücke.
   Both firms are builders of river craft and
  Ruthof is reported to make marine engines up to
  2,000 h.p. and small coastal vessels.


 Engineering and Armaments


M.A.N' Gustavsburg (3)

   The Gustavsburg works of the Maschinenfabrik
  Augsburg-Nürnberg A.G. are normally engaged
  on heavy steel constructional work for bridges,
  steel buildings, lock gates, and gasholders.
  They are believed to employ several thousand
  workers. Gustavsburg is an outlying suburb
  on the right bank of the Rhine opposite Mainz,
  and immediately to the East of the junction of
  the Main with the Rhine. It is connected to
  Mainz by the Eastern railway bridge,over which
  the main line here crosses the river.



- 461 -



  Waggonfabrik     Mainz   (3)
  The Ver. Westdeutsche Waggonfabrik A.G, ,
   of KÖln-Deutz, have large railway-wagon
   building works in the Western quarter of Mainz
   close to the principal railway junction. The
   works were formerly known as the Gebr. Castell,
   Some 1,200 workers were employed here before the
   war.

 Chemicals and Explosives

  Budenheim      Budenheim   (3)
  The Chemische Fabrik Budenheim A.G. are makers
   of pharmaceuticals and chemicals for the food-
   preserving industry and for culinary purposes.-

  Werner & Mertz A. Gw   An der Kaiserbrucke (-)

  This firm manufactures wax and turpentine products,
   including a well-known shoe polish. It is a firm of
   importance in this branch.

  Rheinische Schellackbleiche Ernst Kalkhof  Untere Zugel-Leimen Str. (3)     

  This is one of the leading German bleachers of
   shellac and makers of shellac wax and other
   shellac preparations.

  Dr. Thilo & Co.    Weisenauer Str. (3)
  This firmis one of the principal German makers
   of ether and other anaesthetics.

  Verein für Chemische Industrie (Degussa)  Mombanh  (3)   

  This large works of the Degussa concern is
   largely engaged on the production of methanol,
   acetone, and solvents, oxalic acid, formaldehyde,
   cellulose acetate, etc.


MALAPANE (Silesia)
50° 40' N. 18° 20' E:   805 miles: (1,200)

  Malapane is 12 miles East of Oppeln and on the river Malapane.
  The only industry of importance is the plant of the VOHAG which
  is described below.

  Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys

 VOHAG       Malapane  (3)
  The Malapane works of the Vereinigte Oberschlesische
   Hüttenwerke A.G include electric and open-hearth
   steel furnaces. They have an annual capacity of
   50,000 tons of crude steel. Further particulars of this
   concern are given under the heading GIEIWITZ.


- 462 -

MALCHIN (Mecklenburg)
53° 44' N. 12° 45' E:   565 miles:  (7,300)


  Malchin is situated on the main Rostock—Neu—Rrandenburg^stettin
railway line, approximately 40 miles S.E. of Rostock. It is an
important centre for the production of sugar.

  Foodstuffs

 Vereinigte Zuckerfabriken Malchin u. Teterow   (3) 
 Trocknereien u. Sagewerk Abtₒ Malchin G.nub.H.  (3)

   These firms are large beet-sugar producers with
   a capacity to handle 40,000 quintals of beet
   per day each.



MALCHOW (Mecklenburg)
53° 30' N. 12° 30' E: 530 miles: (5,000)

  Malchow is 25 miles East of Neustrelitz and is a small market
town. There are a few cloth factories, but before the war there was
no industry of note. The large munitions works mentioned below will
have largely increased the figure of 5,000 that represented the pre-
war population.


 Chemicals and Explosives

 Dynamit A.G Malchow  (3)
   Approximately 2 miles to the West of Malchow, in
   the forest known as the Stadtforst, a large shell-
   filling factory has been erected during the war. A
   hutment colony has been erected on the Western side
   of Malchow to accommodate the workers, the number
   of which has been reported to be as high as 15,000.
   The railway line passes through this colony to the
   filling factory, which is near to a lake and is
   well camouflaged in the woods.



- 463 -

MANNHEIM (Baden)
49° 30' N. 8° 30' E:  400 miles: (430,000)

  The twin towns of Mannheim and Ludwigshafen form an industrial
centre of great importance, which lies on either side of the Shine
at the confluence of the Shine and Neckar. Mannheim, which is itself
divided by the river Neckar, lies on the Eastern and Ludwigshafen on
the Western bank of the Shine. The main railway line up the Shine
valley to Basle passes through Mannheim which is a Junction for a
branch leading through Heidelberg and the Neckar valley to Heilbronn
and Stuttgart. To the West a railway crosses the Rhine to Ludwigs-
hafen, Kaiserslautern and the Saar. The harbour area is chiefly
concentrated on the right bank of the Rhine immediately North of
Mannheim. There are three main industrial areas. The first lies to
the North of Ludwigshafen and is entirely covered by the huge chemical
works of the I.G Farbenindustrie concern. These works form the
largest industrial chemical complex in Germany. Opposite these works
and on the right bank of the Alt-Rhine are many engineering concerns,
including Daimler Benz and Brown Boveri. To the South of the City end
in the suburbs of Neckarau and Rheinau are chemical and engineering
plants, marshalling yards and an airport. Frankenthal, which is
situated some five miles North West of Ludwigshafen, is dealt with
separately.


 Inland Port      Mannheim   (1)
   The Mannheim port area is divided into two
   sections which lie on either side of the Neckar
   in the Northern quarter of Mannheim, The Mfthlau-
   Hafen is between the Rhine and the left bank of the
   Neckar and contains numerous warehouses, loading quays
   and rail sidings. The Industriehafen on the opposite
   side of the Neckar contains, beside the usual quay aid
   loading facilities, many small industrial undertakings^
   including engineering concerns, oil storage plants,
   and grain silos. This port is the main transhipment
   centre on the Upper Rhine.

 Inland Port      Ludwigshafen (2)
   The inland port of Ludwigshafen on the left bqnk
   of the Rhine extends from the Southern extremity of
   the I.G. Farbenindustrie Works to the Northern end of
   the Raschig chemical plant, a total distance of three
   miles. This is an important transhipment centre for
   coal and hamiles a large proportion of the products
   of the numerous chemical factories in the twin-towns.
   The area includes warehouses, oil storage plants,
   and grain silos, and is extensively served by rail
   sidings.



- 464 -



  Inland. Port      Rheirym  (3)
   The Rheinau-Hafen has nearly eight miles of
   docks and. extensive storage and. bunkering
   facilities N.xt to the port of Karlsruhe it
   is the principal coal transhipment centre on the
   Upper Rhine.

  Marshalling lards     Mannheim   (2)
   These important yards lie to the South East
   of Mannheim and have a capacity of 7,000 wagons
   per 24 hours

  Marshalling Yards     Ludwigshafen

   The yards at Ludwigshafen can handle up to
   2,200 wagons per 24 hours There is also a
   railway repair shop in this area

  Railway Repair Shop    Schwetzingen (3)

   These important railway workshops employ 1,000
   workers on the repair and maintenance of goods
   wagons and locomotives They are in the Southern
   suburb of Schwetzingen.

 Public Utility Services

  Elektrizitätswerk     Mannheim-Neckarau (1)
   Built in 1923 to replace the existing three stations
   at Mannheim, this thermal power station is owned by
   “Grosskraftwerk Mannheim A.G." and has an installed
   capacity of 162 MW. It is situated on the east bank
   of the river Rhine in the southern suburbs of Mannheim
   and is only 2 miles West of the two important sub-
   stations at Rheinau and three miles East of the sub-
   station at Mundenheim, being connected to both by high
   tension transmission lines It is believed that it is
   also connected, either directly or via Mundenheim, to
   the nearby I.G. Farben works at Ludwigshafen-Oppai
   The station has 11 turbo-generating sets, one of which
   is housed underground Cooling water is taken from
   the river Rhine Underground 20 kV. lines connect the
   station with the old Mannheim power station which now
   serves as a sub-station, with the two other old stations
   in the city with the old Rheinau station and with the
   Badenwerke sub-station In addition there is a double
   circuit 110 W line to Mundenheim sub-station of the
   Pfalzwerke and to the Rheinau sub-station of the
   Badenwerke


- 465 -


   Kraftwerk Ludwigshafen-Oppau  Ludwigshafen (1)
  Owned by the I.G. Farbeniniustrie,. this thermal
  power station is situated between Ludwigshafen and
  Oppau in the N. W. suburbs of Mannheim within the
  site of the I.G. chemical works. Also within the
  site but to the East of it on the west bank of the
  river Rhine is a new station, which in 1943, was
  still under construction. The total installed
  capacity is estimated at 200 MW'. The old station
  had 6 turbo-generators and the new station is
  believed to have one generator with a total of 75
  MW. generating capacity. The source of water for
  cooling is the river Rhine, the new station however,
  though situated close to the river, has two cooling
  towers. Power is supplied to the associated works,
  and the stations are believed to be connected with
  the Mannheim generating station either directly or
  via the Mundenheim sub-station. Half a mile N. W.
  of the chemical works an outdoor sub-stat ion,
  apparently designed for 3 transformers each of 40 W.
  capacity, is under construction. It will be connected
  to three high voltage lines, with the object probably
  of providing a means of incorporating the greater
  part of the electricity requirements of the works in
  the event of damage to the local generating plant.

   Rheinau-Badenwerk    Mannheim  (2)
  These are two sub-stations mile apart.
  They are situated in the wood about 5 miles S.E.
  of Mannheim between the villages of Rheinau and
  Friedrichsfeld. The most northerly one, owned
  by R.W.E. consists of an open-air section with
  plant for 220 kV, 110 kV, and possibly lower
  voltages. The more southerly One, owned by the
  Badenwerk A.G-. Karlsruhe, consists of an indoor
  section with plant for 110 kV and 20 kV.

  From the R.W.E. station:-
  two 380/220 kV double circuit lines connect to
  Kelsterbach and Höheneck.
  four 110 kV lines connect to Heidelberg
  Neiderhausen
  Neckarsteinach
        Badenwerk
  1 20 kV line connects along an unknown route

  From the Badenwerk station:-
  three 110 kV lines connect to Scheibenhardt
  Schwabenheim
  Mannheim f/S

  Three 20 kV lines connect to Mannheim P/S
        Rheinau P/S
        Schwabenheim



- 466 -



  Mundenheim     Mannheim   (2)
  This is a sub-station situated to the West of
  Mannheim. Besides being connected by 100-4 50
  kV line to the Mannheim main power station,
  it is connected also by a 100-4 50'kV line to
  the power station at Homburg by a northerly and
  southerly route, in the north via Kaiserslautern,
  and in the south via Speyer, Landau and Pirmassens.
  It is also believed to be connected with the I.G.
  Farben works at Ludwigshaf en-0ppau.

  Gaswerke      Mannheim-Luzeriberg  (3) 

  In 195& the Municipal gasworks of Mannheim
  produced 1,230 million cubic feet of gas. They
  are situated in the northern suburb of Luzenburg,
  directly east of the Industriehafen and approximately
  2 miles North of Mannheim main station. Gas is supplied
  by this works to seven other towns including Heidelberg,
  Viernheim and Weinheim.

 Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys

  Stahlwerk      Rheinau   (3)

  The Stahlwerk Mannheim A.G. iron and steel works
  are engaged on the manufacture of steel pressings
  and forgings. The Hüttenabteilung includes two'
  basic open-hearth and one Thomas converter. In
  1938 the company employed some 600 workers.

 Non-ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

  Gebr. Giulini      Mundenheim (-)

  The works of this firm are situated in the Western
  suburb of Mundenheim. Their last known (1939)
  alumina capacity was 80,000 tons but it is estimated
  that the capacity had increased by 1943 to 90,000
  tons per annum. In 1938 the company employed some
  1 ,700 workers.

 Aircraft and Aero-Engines

  Schutte-Lanz      Schwetzingen (3)
  In the outlying suburb of Schwetzingen the
  Schutte-Lanz Holzwerke have a plywood factory
  which is reported to be makii^ frames and
  components for trainer aircraft.

 Shipbuilding
  Schiffs & Maschinenbau A.G.   Mannheim (3)  
  Reconnaissance photographs show that this small
  shipbuilding yard is now mainly engaged on the
  building of tank landing craft. In January 1944
  at least three and possibly ten T.L.C. were building
  on the slips.


- 467 -

 

 Engineering and Armaments

Brown Boveri Käfertal (1)
 The engineering concern of Brown Boveri & Co.
 A.G. have their main German factory in the North
  Eastern suburb of Käfertal. This plant manufactures
  electric motors and other electrical installations for
  submarines, and was reported to employ some 2,000
  workers in 1942. The works is also one of the leading
  German makers of transformers, turbines and other plant
  for power stations, as well as electrical steam and air
  compressors and a variety of other electrical equipment.

  Heinrich Lanz A.G.     Mannheim  (1)
 Heinrich Lanz A.G. have their main works in Mannheim
 and a branch factory in Zweibrücken. They are believed
 to employ some 8,000 workers and manufacture tractors
 (known as the “Bulldog") A.F.V's and tank components,
 (possibly conplete tanks) on a considerable scale.
 Prior to the war Lanz was the principal German maker
 of heavy agricultural machinery and it is believed that
 certain parts of the Mannheim works are still engaged
 on this activity.

  Joseph Vögele A.G.     Mannheim  (2)
 This company produces tank components, M.V. and
 tractor parts and various types of machinery for the
 chemical and food industries. In 1938 the factory
 employed approximately 1 ,000 workers but ground reports
 suggest that this figure had trebled by 1942.

  Gebr. Sülzer A.G.    Ludwigshafen (2)
 This is a subsidiary company cf the Sulzer concern
 of Switzerland. It is believed to employ about
 1,000 workers on the manufacture of Diesel ergines
 for use in naval vessels

  Motorenwerke Mannheim    Waldhof   (2)
 The Motorenwerke Mannheim A.G. is situated in the
 North Eastern suburb of Waldhof. It has been reported
 to be engaged exclusively on the building of Diesel
 engines for submarines, and is believed to have
 employed some 1500 workers in 1941

  Daimler Benz A.G.    Waldhof   (1)
 The Daimler Benz concern, the parent works of which
 are in Stuttgart-Untertflrkheim, have a large branch
 factory in Mannheim. The Mannheim plant is believed
 to be engaged mainly on the manufacture of light army
 cars, A.F.V¹ s, Diesel engines for heavy military trans-
 port, and a variety of motor transport components. In
 1938 this branch employed nearly 10,000 workers.



- 468 -

Bopp & Reuter Waldhof   (2)
  The Bopp & Reuter G.m.b.H. are mainly engaged on
  the manufacture of valves and gauges, control and
  measuring instruments, flow meters, etc. and according
  to ground reports employed some 2,000 workers in 1938.

 Honmelweike G.nub.H.     Waldhof   (2)
  This plant is adjacent to the Brown Boveri works, and
  makes a wide range of precision tools and instruments
  on a large scale. Prior to the war this factory
  employed more than 1,000 workers.

 Neidig Sohne     Industriehafen (3)
  Franz August Neidig Sohne manufacture pumps for
  use in submarines and other naval craft. In 1937
  the company employed some 4-00 workers.

 Stotz-Kontakt G.m.b.H.    Neckarau  (3)
  This is a subsidiary company of the Brown Boveri
  concern. It is making electric equipment for aircraft
  and submarines.


 Chemicals and Explosives

 I. G. Farbenindustrie A.G. Ludwigshafen-Oppau  (1+)


  From the Northern end of Ludwigshafen railway station
  and stretching for some three miles along the left bank
  of the Rhine as far as the small village of Oppau, is
  the largest and probably most important of all the
  German chemical works. It was formerly known as the
  Badische Anilin-& Soda Fabrik but is now a part of the
  great I.G. Farbenindustrie concern. Among its principal
  products are chlcrsulphonic acid which is believed to be
  produced at a rate of 90,000 t. p.a., or 75% of z the total
  German output; opannol, for which it is the largest
  German producer; sulphuric acid and oleum, made here at
  a rate of about 300,000 t.p.a. or 15% of the total
  estimated German output in 1943; anrnonia, for which the
  plant has a capacity of 180,000 t.p.a. of which a consid-
  erable amount is converted to amonium nitrate for
  explosives; dyestuffs made at a rate of approximately
  15,000 t~p.a. or 30-35% of the estimated total German
  output; furthermore the Ludwigshafer/Oppau works accounts
  for a considerable proportion of the total German
  production of other heavy and miscellaneous chemicals.

  In the course of the war a very large new plant (or
  group of plants) has been erected between what were
  formerly known as the Ludwigshafen works and the Oppau
  works. It is believed that a large part of the new
  works is engaged on the production of Buna.


- 469 -



   Buckau A.G.     Rheinau   (3)
   The Chemische Fabrik Buckau A.G. in the Eastern
   suburb of Rheinau employs some 700 workers on the
   manufacture of explosives, toxic acid, metallic
   salts, and sulphuric acid, of which the plant is
   reported to have a yearly output of 20,000 tons.
   This is a subsidiary company of the Theodore
   Goldschmidt A.G. of Essen.

   Rheinische Gummi-d Celluliod Fabrik Neckarau (3)
   This very large works is owned by the Dynamit A. G.
   and the Westfßlisch-Anhaltisehe Sprengstoff A, G.
   Before the war it was mainly engaged on the
   production of eelluliod and cellulose and the
   manufacture of celluliod and rubber goods such as
   combs, toys, decorative ware etc. The plant is
   reported to be fully active but its present range
   of products is not known.

   Strebelwerk G.m,b.H.     Mannheim (3)
   Prior to the war this firm specialized in the
   manufacture of boilers and radiators etc. and
   employed about 1,000 workers. It is now believed
   to be mainly engaged on the manufacture of hand
   grenades, and anti-tank and anti-personnel mines.
   The Strebelwerk operate a total of four factories
   in Mannheim situated at Hansa Str., Franzosen Str.,
   Hombusch Str. and Diffene Str.

   Suddeutsche Kabelwerke    (a) Rhenaina Str.) (3)
							 (b) Walähof Str. )

   These cable works are a subsidiary of the V.D.M.
   company and make electric cables on a fairly large
   scale.

   Carl Platz G.m.b.H.     Schanz Str. (3)
   This firm employed some 400 workers in 1939 on
   the manufacture of machine tools.

   Kali-Chemie A.G.     Wohlgelegen (3)
   This large chemical undertaking has its head-
   quarters in Berlin and branch factories in many
   parts of Germany. The Mannheim works are situated
   in the North Eastern suburb of Wohgelegen, and
   manufacture sulphuric acid, nitric acid, accumulator
   acid, hydrochloric acid, and other similar types
   of chemicals.



- 470 -

 Zellstoff Fabrik     Waldhof   (2)
   The Zellstoff Fabrik Waldhof A.G. is situated
   in the North Eastern suburb of Waldhof, and
   formerly manufactured chemical pulp, tanning extract,
   and sulphite alcohol. The company has branch
   factories in Prussia, Bavaria and Silesia, and in all
   its plants employed in 1938 a total of some 14,000
   workers.

 Knoll A.G.      Ludwigshafen (2)
   Cardia zol. This is the product for which KnoF-1 is
   most famous. It is from cyclohexanone purchased from
   the I. G-. Farbenindustrie.
   Opiates, Knoll do not produce- plant extracts but
   purchase morphine, codeine, etc.
   Diuretins
   Barbiturates
   Tenalbin
   Ic thiol

   In general Knoll specialised in pharaceutical products
   which were not produced from basic raw materials, but
   from purchased intermediaries. For this reason, the
   importance of the factory vas very much greater than was
   indicated by the number of workers. Total personnel,
   including clerical staff and packers, was 800. It is not
   known precisely what proportion of the manufacture was
   destined for export, but it has been estimated that it was
   more than 5Q4. A large proportion of the export trade was
   with South America.

   A certain amount of the products was marketed direct to
   hospitals, doctors, etc,, but there were branch establish-
   ments at Berlin and Munich for the purpose of warehousing
   and propaganda.

 Deutsche Bergin A.G,     Rheinau   (-)

   The Deutsche Bergin A. G. fur Holz-Hydrolyse have their
   main works in Heidelberg. The Rheinau branch employed
   150'workers in 1938 on the manufacture of wood alcohol,
   yeast, and wood sugar,, of which the annual capacity is
   reported to be 6,000 tons,

 Sunlicht A.G.     Rheinau (-)

   This soap factory, which formerly belonged to the
   Unilever concern, employed 1,900 workers in 1938,

 Foodstuffs

 Mannheimis one of the principal flour milling and grain
distribution centres in Germany and although a certain amount of de
Centralization has taken place, it is believed that a large proportion
of the undamaged milling installations and storage facilities are
still being utilized. Ground reports suggest the Ludwigshafener
Walzmuhle which is one of the largest flour mills in Germany is still
active.


- 471 -



 Verein Deutscher Oelfabriken    Industriehafen (-)

   Situated in the Industrie-Hafen area this plant
   produces and refines edible oils and fats and in
   1938 had a capacity to handle 108,000 tons of
   seed p.a

 Ludwigshafener Walzmühle    Ludwigshafen (3)
   These works are situated within the Ludwig-Hafen
   area. They are believed to be among the largest
   flour mills in Germany with a daily capacity of
   8,000 tons of flour and storage facilities for
   450,000 tons of grain.

 Werner & Nicola Germania Muhlenwerke    Mannheim  (-)

   These mills are situated in the Lagerstrasse.
   The milling capacity is 300 tons per day and
   storage capacity is estimated at 20,000 tons.

  Apart from the above, many flour mills and grain silos which
are all of considerable size are situated within the built-up area
of Mannheim; no details as to their capacity are, however, available:-

Pfalsische Mühlenwerke A.G.  6 Rheinroth Str. Mannheim (-)

Aktiengesellschaft für   MfiRlsriLetrieb 68/70 Hafen Str. Mannheim (-)

Huber & Co.      4/6 Industries Str. Mannheim (-)
  
Hildebrand Rheinmuhlen We ike A.G. Industriehafen 5 Hambusch Str.  Mannheim (-)

Erste Mannheimer Dampftauhle  von Ed. Kauffmann Sohne G.m'b.H. Hafenstr. Mannheim (-)



- 472 -

MANSFELD (Saxony)
See under Eisieben

MARBURG (Hesse Nassau)
50° 50' N. 8° 45' E: 390 miles: (29,000)

  Marburg is on the main line from Kassel to Frankfort/Main,
approximately halfway between the two. It is a university town.
Its activities are connected mainly with agriculture' but in
addition to several small industries, including the manufacture of
wallpaper, there is an important chemical plant, which is mentioned
below.

 Transportation

  Railway Repair Shops    Marburg  (3)
  These are medium-sized repair shops undertaking
  the repair of goods wagons.

 Chemicals and Explosives

  I. G-. Farbenindust rie   Marburg  (2)
  The "Behring Werke” of the I.G-. Farben combine are in
  the suburb of Marbach on the Northern outskirts of the
  town. These works are among the leading makers of
  serums and produce in addition pharmaceuticals and
  medical products, as well as dyes and heavy chemicals.



MARIENBURG (East Prussia)
54° 02' N. 19° 02' E: 820 miles: (27,000)

  Marienburg is in the extreme West of the province of East
Prussia close to the border of the former Danziger Freistaat, and
is on the main line fron Northern Germany to Königsberg, forming
a junction with a branch line leading to Danzig. It is op the river
Nogat, which is a tributary of the Vistula, and navigable for small
craft. In peacetime there were no industries of great importance,
and the town was mainly an agricultural centre. Since the war,
however, a Focke-Wulf aircraft works has been erected near the town.
These works are mentioned below.

 Aircraft and Aero-Engines

  Focke-Wulf     Königsdorf   (1)
  These highly important aircraft works were erected
  probably in 1941-42 as a result of the decision
  by Focke-Wulf to transfer aircraft assembly from
  Bremen to what then seemed to be less vulnerable
  areas in the East. They were built as an assembly
  plant fed by components from Cottbus, Posen and
  Kresinki. The works are .solely engaged on the
  assembly of the FA-190 single engine fighter. The
  works are at the village of Königsdorf, 4 miles East
  of Marienburg; and one mile South of the Marienburg-
  Elbing highway. Up to August 1943 the plant was
  still in process of expansion, and more than 1,000
  workers, including Ps/W were engaged on the excavations.

- 473 -

MARL (Westphalia)
51° 40' N. 7° 5' E: 310 miles: (36,000)

 Marl is 6 miles North-west of Recklinghausen and the
  municipality includes a number of small settlements lying
  immediately to the South of this stretch of the Wesel-Datteln
  branch canal, which follows the course of the River Lippe. These
  settlements include Hüls, where one of the largest of Germany's
  synthetic-rubber plants has been erected. There are also
  several coal mines in the area.

 Transportation

 Marshalling Yards     Sinsen  (3)
  The marshalling yards at Sinsen, near Marl, are
  capable of handling up to 2,Q00 wagons per 24
  hours.

 Public Utility Services

 Power Station     Hüls   (2)
  The thermal power station, which forms part of
  the synthetic rubber works (see under " R.
  and T. ") is owned by Steinkohlen-Elektrizitftts
  A.G., Essen, a subsidiary of the R.W.E., and is
  leased to the Chemische Werke Hüls G.m.b.H. The
  installed capacity is 150 mW. which is probably
  taken entirely by the rubber plant, whose demand
  is estimated to be up to 125 MW. and whose annual
  requirements are about 900 million kWh. Steam
  as well as electricity are supplied to the
  works. At the pithead of the adjacent colliery (see under
  " S. F. ") is a small station containing about
  10 MW. capacity of generating plant. A transformer
  station is situated to the South-west of the main
  station. A line, probably operated at 110 kv,
  connects to the 135 MW. station at Lünen, possibly
  via Recklinghausen.

  Solid Fuels

 Auguste Viktoria      Hüls   (3)
  The coal mine of the Gewerkschaft Auguste Viktoria
  at Hüls has four pit heads, and in 1937 produced
  1,200,000 tons of coal. There is a coking plant
  (230 ovens) with an annual estimated dry-coal
  capafity of 860,000 tons. Some 4,000 workers were
  employed in 1937.

  Rubber and Tyres

 Chemische Werke Hüls G.m.b.H.   Hüls   (1)
  HÜls lies near the village of Marl, about ten
  miles East of Essen. Before the war a coke-oven
  plant founded by Ruhrchemie and Th. Goldschmidt,
  produced ethylene, ethylene chlorhydrin, ethylene
  glycol, ethylene oxide and ethylene glycol ethers.
  This plant was acquired by Chemische Werke Hüls
  G.m.b.H. owned jointly by I.G.Farbenindustrie and
 

- 474 -

 
  Be rgwerksge seil sic haft Hibernia A. G. (which is
  owned by the Prussian State). The original
  capital in 1938 was RM. 30,000,000 of which
  RM. 22,200,000 belonged to I.G. and 7,800,000
  to Hibernia.

  Construction of a synthetic rubber plant was
  announced early in 1937 and completed in 1940. Unlike
  the plant at Schkopau, Hdls was designed to make its
  acetylene from hydrocarbon gases by the electric arc
  process; otherwise the same four-stage process is used,
  It is believed that when production first started gas
  was used from the existing coke oven plant, but at a
  later date a pipe line from the Gelsenkirchen oil plant
  was completed and presumably the waste hydrocarbon
  gases from this plant are now used, either alone or
  in conjunction with the coke oven gas.

  It is believed that the styrene and aciylic nitrile
  also required for Buna production are made within the
  works. Power comes principally from a plant within
  the works of about 150 mW. capacity which is owned by
  Steinkohlen Kiekt ria it Äts A.G. Essen, (Steag), a
  subsidiary of the R.W.E. This plant has been leased to
  Chemische Werke Httls for fifteen years. Steag has
  also undertaken to supply any additional current
  required fromits plant at I/Lnen on the Lippe, and
  a power line with transformer station is already
  installed.

  Coal for the coke oven and power plant is brought
  in by conveyor from Shaft III of the Auguste Viktoria
  Colliery owned bjjr I.G., which is situated at the
  eastern boundary of the works.

  There is little doubt that the nominal capacity
  of Hüls is about 3Q,000 tons per annum and that output
  was, at least approximately, restored to this figure
  early in 1944 after' the successful attack of June 194-3


MAYEN (Rhineland)
50° 20' N. 7° 15' E: 350 miles: (16,000)

  Mayen is 15 mil as East of Koblenz in the hilly Eifel district.
Its main activities are concerned with the extensive basalt quarries
in this neighbourhood. The town is an agricultural centre and has
a large cattle market. There are no other industries of note.


MECHERNICH (Eifel Rheinprovinz) 
50° 36' N. 6° 40' E: 305 miles: (6,800)

  Mechernich is a small industrial town situated approximately 30
 miles S.W. of Köln and 30 miles S„E. of Aachen, on the Köln-Trier
railway line. Lead and other minerals are mined and smelted to the
South of the town.
  Gewerkschaft Mec he rniche: r Werke  Mechernich (3)  
  This company is own ed by Preussag. They work their own
  lead ore fields and also produce copper, iron, manganese,
  cobalt and nickel. Their annual capacity of lead is

- 475 -

   estimated to be not less than 10,000 metric tons
  crude and 10,000 metric tons refined lead
  respectively. The company have a pliant for the
  production of sulphuric acid, with am estimated
  output for 1937 of 3,0°0 tons of 100} £ acid, rising
  to 3,600 tons in 1938, and an estimated production
  of sulphur trioxide of 2,600 tons per annum.


MEERANE (Saxony)
50° 50' N. 12° 30' E: 550 miles:  (26,000)

  Meerane is 25 miles West of Chemnitz, There is a considerable
textile industry- which is in the hands of a number of small firms.
There are several spinning mills, an example of which is mentioned
below, and a number of weaving factories producing sailcloth and
wearing apparel.

 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

  Kammgarnspinnerei      Wilh.Wunderlichstr.(-)

   The Kammgarnspinnerei Meerane A.G-. have a
  spinning mill with 35,000 spimiles, which
  employed some 4-00 workers in 1938.



MEININGEN (Thuringia)
50° 35' N. 10° 25' E: 460 miles:   (20,000)

  Meiningen is in the Western area of the Tbiflringer Wald on a
branch railway which leads Southwards from Ezlsenach to Coburg.
Apart from the railway repair shops, there are in peacetime no
industries of importance. It has been reported however that the
Humboldt-Deutz concern have erected a factory here since the outbreak
of war.

 Transportation

  Railway Repair Shops    Meiningen  (3)
   These repair shops are believed to employ some
  2,300 workers and repair locomotives and all
  kinds of rolling stock.

 Engineering and Armaments

  Klöckner-Humboldt-Deutz     Meiningen  (-)

   It was reported in 1942 that the KJ.öckner-Humboldt-
  Deutz Motoren-Werke A.G. of Köln had. erected a new
  factory in 1941 near Heiningen, to which part of
  their tank and motor -vehicle production was said to
  have been transferred. The reports, put the number of
  workers employed in Meiningen as high as 13,000, an
  improbable figure for a works in this town.

- 476 -

MEISSEN (Saxony)
51° 10' N. 13° 30' E: 590 miles: (47,000)

 Meissen is on the River Elbe 10 miles North-west of Dresden,
The main industry in peacetime is the manufacture of Meissener (or
Dresden)
china. The works of the Staatliche Porzellan Manufaktur
are in the town, and the pits from which the special china clay is
obtained are in the neighbourhood. There are various other porcelain
and stoneware manufacturers, and subsidiary factories making colours
and dyes for the ceramic industry. Insulators and similar technical
stoneware are also among the town's products. Meissen has a number
of textile mills, engineering works, and metalware factories, but
apart from those mentioned below none is of importance.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Zünder Kabelwerke      Meissen (3)
   The Ver. Zünder & Kabelwerke A.G-. are makers of
   detonators and fuses, electric fuses, and insulated
   cables. They have two factories in Meissen, a third
   in Siebenlehn, 10 miles to the South-west, and a
   fourth in Lage, near Detmold. They employed some
   2,000 workers before the war.

 Elektrowärme      Sörnewitz (3)
   The Siemens Elektrowärme G. m.b.H. are makers
   of electric heating apparatus and drying chambers
   for both industrial and domestic purposes. In
   1938 some 800 workers were employed.

 Imperial      Hainstr. (-)

   The Maschinenfabrik Imperial G.m.b.H.
   are makers of filters ard drying apparatus.

 

MELLE (Hanover)
52° 12' N. 8° 20' E: 365 miles: (5,400)

 Melle lies 12 miles East of Osnabrück, on the Osnabrück-
Minden railway line.

 Chemicals and Explosives

 0. Holtmeyer & Co.     Melle (-)

   This firm makes sulphurio acid. Their production
   of 100^i acid, is estimated to have been about 7,000 tons
   in 1937.

 Rubber and Tyres

 Melle G-ummiwarenfabrik G.m.b.H.  Melle (-)

   This firm formerly employed 2U0 workers on mechanical
   products; they are now probably making fuel tanks,
   befo:re the war they were associated with Melos K.G-.

- 477 -

Melos K.G-. Karl Bösch    Melle (-)

   This firm are producers of reclaim, Their
   pre-war capacity amounted to 150'tons per month.

MEMMINGEN (Bavaria)
48° N. 10° 10' E: 520 miles:   (17,000)

   Memmingen is in the South-western area of Bavaria, 25 miles
  South of Ulm, and on a railway leading from Ulm to Kennten. It
  is the market town for the surrounding agricultural district, in
  particular for the dairy industry of the Northern part of the
  Bavarian Allgau. There are several small textile factories
  making hosiery and knitted goods, but no industry of importance.



MENDEN (Westphalia)
51° 25' N. 7° 50' E: 340 miles:  (17,000)

   Menden is 12 miles South of Hamm and is a tourist centre for
  the Northern pert of the hilly district known as the Sauerland.
  There is a considerable metal industry, which is in the hands of
  numerous small firms and workshops, and produces all kinds of
  small metal goods, such as brassware, harness buckles, small bicjdLe
  fittings, and similar articles. None of the factories is
  individually of importance.



MERSEBURG (Province Saxony)
51° 20' N. 12° E:  520 miles: (45,000)

   Merseburg is 10 miles South of Halle on the main railway line
  from Berlin to Erfurt and Frankfort/Main.  The town s chief
  importance is due to the Leuna Werke of the I.G-. Farben concern, a
  synthetic-oil and chemical plant which is of the highest value to
  the German war effort. These works, which are situated near to
  the village of Leuna, one mile South of Merseburg, are described
  below. The industries of the town of Merseburg itself include
  paper and cardboard manufacture and a few engineering works, none
  of which is individually of importance.

 Transportation

   Märshalling lard    Merseburg (3)

   The marshalling yard has a capacity of 2,000 wagons per
   24 hours.

 Public Utility Services

   Electric Power Station   Leuna  (1)
   This thermal generating station forms part of the
   Leuna Werke referred to below under Liquid Fuels.
   It is situated in the centre of the works and has
   an installed capacity of 150 mW. There is a single
   generator house but a group of buildings under con-
   struction to the South of the site is believed to be
   for a new generating station which will have an esti-
   mated installed capacity of 100 MW. There is an

- 478 -

 

   indoor sub-station to which high-voltage overhead
   lines are connected and are believed to connect to^
   Gross Kayna and Schkopau. Medium- and low-voltage
   cables supply the works.  Medium-voltage lines connect
   to Ammendorf, Mücheln and Poserna.

 Liquid Fuels and Substitutes

 Ammoniakwerke Merseburg   Leuna (1+)

   The works of the Ammoniakwerke Merseburg G.m.b.H.,
   which belong to the I,G. Farben concern, adjoin
   the village of Leuna on its Southern side. The
   Leunawerke is one of the largest industrial plants
   in Germary and covers an area of about 1-J- sq. miles,
   manufacturing ammonia, fertilisers, chemicals, synthetic
   oil and other products. The production of synthetic
   petrol was begun here on a large scale in the year
   1932, and since that date, both before and during the
   war, the works have been continually extended. The
   Bergius hydrogenation process is used for the treatment
   of brown coal and brown-coal tar. Reports indicate
   that in 1943 an annual capacity of 600,000 tons of
   liquid products had been reached. The Leuna Werke
   output of methanol was estimated in 1943 to be covering
   three-fourths of Germany's requirements. A wide
   range of other synthetic hydrocarbons is also made at
   Leuna. Some 50,000 workers are engaged at the Leuna
   works, more than half of this total being women. There
   are workers' colonies at Leuna and Merseburg, but a
   large proportion of the labour travels daily from Halle.

 Chemicals and Explosives.

 I.G. Farbenindustrie A.G. (Ammoniakwerke Merseburg G.m.b.H.)  Leuna near Merseburg. (1) 


   This synthetic Ammonia plant produces liquid
   ammonia, ammonium sulphate, calcium nitrate,
   sodium nitrate, etc. The plant has a capacity
   of 730,000 tons of nitrogen annually, and the
   estimated production in 1939 was 420,000 tons.
   The works includes a small synthetic rubber plant
   with an estimated annual capacity of 1,000 tons.

METTMANN (Rhineland)
51° 15' N. 7° E: 510 miles: (14,000)

 Mettmann is 5 miles East of Düsseldorf. The chief activity,
which is in the hands of several firms, is the manufacture of cutlery
and similar small metal products. There are also a number of factories
specialising in weighing machines. Examples of these firms, none of
which is of great importance, are given below.

 Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

 Hermann Kliss      Mettmann (-)

   This firm manufactures galvanised sheets (including
   corrugated sheets) and zinc products.

- 479 -

 

 Engineering and Armaments


   Vf. Seibel     Mettmann   (-)

    The Mettmanner Britannia Warenfabrik
    W. Seibel are manufacturers of steel,
    stainless steel, aluminium and nickel-
    plated cutlery

   Freudewald     Mettmann   (-)

    The Barmer Waagenfabrik C. August Freudewald
    is one of a number of firms in Mettmann
    specialising in weighing machines and kitchen
    utensils.



MEUSELWITZ (Thuringia)
51° 02' N. 12° 17' E: 540 miles:  (10,600)

    Meuselwitz is a town 8 miles East of Zeitz and
    West of Altenburg.

 Rubber and Tyres.

   Heymer-Pilz Sohne    Meuselwitz (3)

    This firm specialises in reclaim and solid tyres and
    mechanicals. They produced various kinds of rubber
    goods such as hose and belting, and also produced-
    possibly 1,800 tons of reclaim per annum for sale to
    rubber factories in addition to their own needs.

MINDEN (Westphalia)
52° 15' N. 8° 55' E:   390 miles: (29,000)

   Minden is on the main railway line from Berlin via Hannover
 to Western Germary. It lies on the left bank of the Weser
 two miles downstream from the Porta Westfalica, the narrow gap
 in the hills which divide Westphalia from the North German plain.
 The Mittellandkanal crosses the Weser at Minden. The town has
 a variety of industries (most of the factories being individually
 small), including lead-pipe making, furniture, industrial porcelain
 and stoneware products, and clothing and uniform manufacture. The
 most important industry in Minden is now the aeroplane works
 mentioned below.

 Transportation

   Inland Harbour      Minden   (2)
    The important Junction of the river Weser and the
    Mittelland Canal is in the North quarter of the town,
    and consists of a system of locks, a pumping station,
    the aqueduct carrying the canal over the river, and
    the inland harbour. The locks overcome a 4-6 ft. head
    between the canal and the river. The Canal is the
    link between the Rhine, Weser and Elbe and is the main
    artery of the German inland waterways system.
    The level of the canal is maintained by water pumped
    from the Weser at Minden. Minden is an important

- 480 -


  transit centre for grain. Grain from Hanover is
  shipped down the Weser to Bremen or by the Mittelland
  Canal to the Rhine via the Dortmund-Ems Canal.

  Aircraft and Aero-Engines

  Peschke      Minden   (3)
  The Peschke Flugzeugwerkstätten G.m.b.H. are
  aircraft-repair shops. These works appear
  to have been expanded, and it is possible that
  they are now making some aircraft components on
  the spot. The works are in the Northern part of
  Minden near to the inland harbour.

  Engineering and Armaments

  Schütte A.G,      Minden   (3)
  The Schütte A.G. für Tonindustrie employed some
  900 workers in 1939 and are makers of porcelain
  and stoneware products for building, drainage,
  and industrial purposes.
      

MITTWEIDA (Saxony)
51° N. 13° E: 570 miles:  (19,000)

  Mittweida is 12 miles North of Chemnitz on the River Zschopau,
  which has been damnied a few miles North of the town to form a large
  reservoir. This is one of several such reservoirs on which the
  industrial towns of Saxony (where there is little ground water)
  depend for their water supply. Textiles form the main industry of
  Mittweida, and there are several spinning, weaving, and shirt-making
  factories, of which an example is mentioned below. There are also
  a number of small e ngineering works.

  Weisst haler      Bahnhof str.  (-)

  The Weisst toiler Spinnerei A.G. are cotton
  spinners and weavers and employed some 400
  workers in L937.

MOERS (Rhineland)
51° 25' N. 6° 35' E: 250 miles: (30,000)

  Moers is 4 miles from the left bank of the Rhine at Homberg,
  opposite Duisburg'The population is mainly engaged in coal
  mining. inhere is a 1 Large colliery and a synthetic-oil plant to the
  East of Moers, which are described under the heading Homberg, and
  another colliery, which is mentioned below, at Neukirchen, 3 miles
  to theF West of Moers. Other industries of the town, which include
  a few eng:ineering works, are not important.

  Solid Fuels
  Niederzrheinische Bergwerks A.G.  Neukirchen  (-)

  The coal mine of the Niederrheinische Bergwerks
  A.G. has one pithead, and produced 600,000 tons
  of coal in 1-937. 1,300 workers were then employed.

- 481 -

MÖHNE DAM
See tinder SOEST.



MOSBACH (Baden)
49° 21' N. 09° 08' E: 440 miles: (5500)

   Mosbach is a town some 12 miles South-east of Eberbach
   and 16 miles North of Heilbronn, on the railway line Würzburg-
   Heilbronn, in the valley of the Neckar. It is an old town
   with mediaeval associations and buildings.

 Engineering and Armaments

   Gmeinder & Co,    Mosbach   (-)

   Gmeinder & Co. G.m.b.H. were among the
   earliest manufacturers of narrow-gaiuge
   diesel locomotives for mining and
   agricultural work. Since the outbizeak
   of war this type of loco has been almost
   entirely abandoned except for export
   purposes and details of the present
   activities of the firm are not known.

- 482 -

MÖHLDORF (Bavaria)
48° 15' N. 12° 35' E:   620 miles:   (8,000)

 Mühldorf is on the River Inn close to the former Austrian border
and. on the railway line from Munich via Braunau to Austria. A number
of important industrial undertakings is grouped in the neighbourhood
of this town. The VAWAG have an aluminium works 6 miles to the East
in the small village of Toging. The administrative headquarters of
these works are in Muhldorf itself. The pre-war population as given
above has probably been increased owing to the expansion of these
works. There is an explosives works at Kraiburg, 6 miles to the
South-west, and further upstream on the River Inn. The works,
described below, is one of a number of chemical and explosives factories
dispersed over this part of Bavaria. Others are dealt with under the
headings Alt&tting, Burghausen, and Trostberg. Five miles to the South-
east of Mnhldorf, at the village of Steiner am Hart, on a branch rail-
way leading to Trostberg, there is a large calcium carbide and cynamide
works.
 The stretch of the River Inn between Wasserburg and Toging, a
distance of 25 miles, is utilised for an important hydro-electric
scheme.

 Public Utility Services

 Inn-Alz Hydro Scheme     Toging   (1) 
  Toging, which is 3 miles East of Muhldorf,
  contains the largest of a chain of four
  hydro electric stations, which utilise the
  water power of the River Inn, and supply
  electricity to the group of electro-chemical
  and metallurgical plants situated in this
  area. This hydro scheme works in conjunction
  with the generating stations along the valley
  of the River Alz, a tributary of the Inn. The
  Alz stations are dealt with separately under
  the heading Trostberg.
  These stations along the Inn valley extend
  from Wasserburg, 20 miles upstream and South-
  west of Muhldorf, to Toging, and include
  generating stations at Wasserburg (65MW),
  Teufelsbruck (65MW), Gars (65MW), and
  Toging (97MW). A lateral canal 15 miles
  long has been cut parallel with the river
  from Jettenbach to Toging.

 Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

 VAWAG        Toging   (1)
  The works of the Ver. Al minium Werke A. G.
  is situated at Toging, 3 miles to the East
  of Mühldorf. The administrative offices are
  in Muhldorf. The estimated capacity of the
  plant is 40,000 tons of aluminium per annum.
  In 1943 some 12,000 workers were reported to
  be employed.

- 483 -

 
 Chemicals and Explosives

Explosives Factory    Kraiburg   (2)
   This factory has be£n built during the
   present war, and there is no reliable
   information regarding its ownership or
   its exact location. No photographic
   cover of the factory exists. Reports
   state that it is engaged on the
   manufacture of propellant-powder, both
   in the form of square flakes and rods.
   It is stated that between 18,000 and
   20,000 workers were employed in 1942,
   and that the labour force has subsequently
   been increased to 40,000. It is probable
   that the latter figure is somewhat
   exaggerated, but there seems considerable
   evidence of the existence here of a very
   large propellant-powder plant, of which the
   capacity may be upwards of 30,000 tons of
   finished powder per annum

Bayerische Kraftwerke A. G.    Steiner am Hart (3)

   A large calcium carbide and cynamide
   works, which works in conjunction with
   the similar works at Tacherting near
   Trostberg, is situated at the village of
   Steiner am Hart, 5 miles South-east of
   Muhldorf. This company, which was
   concerned with the development of the
   hydro-electric scheme mentioned above,
   took over the carbide plant at Steiner
   am Hart from the Bayerische Stickstoffwerke.
   Production figures are not available.


MÜHLHAUSEN (Province Saxony)
51° 15' N. 10° 25' E:   460 miles: (40,000)

  Muhlhausen is a market town 30 miles North-west of Erfurt,
 on the Northern edge of the Thüringer Wald. There are several
 small spinning and weaving mills, leather-goods factories, and
 a number of makers of machinery, chiefly knitting machines for
 use in the textile industry. None is individually of
 importance.


- 484 -


MÜHLHEIM (Rhineland)
51° 25' N. 6° 55' E: 304 miles:  (136,000)

   Mülheimis situated on both sides of the river Ruhr, and the
  area considered here is approximately the administrative district
  of Mülheim. It should not be confused with Mülheim, a suburb of
  Cologne.

   There are important marshalling yards which lie on the lines
  to Dortmund, Bochum, and Essen, and an adjoining locomotive-repair
  shop. North of the railway station lies an important industrial
  concentration containing two steelworks, the Tlvs³eⁿ works and the
  Friedrich Wilhelmshütte, and also the large engineering works of
  Siemens-Schuckert.

   The river Ruhr is navigable by ordinary barges to about one
  mile beyond Mülheim, but by smaller barges up to Witten.

  Transportation

   Marshalling Yards      Speldorf   (3)
    The yards are situated on the West bank
   of the river Ruhr, 1 mile West of Mülheim
   station. . The capacity of the yards is
   3,000 wagons per 24 hours and, before the
   war, were being used to 40% of their
   capacity.
    The importance of the yards is attributable
   to their position on one of the principal
   lines from the great industrial cities of
   Dortmund, Bochum, and Essen. Though only
   of moderate size they are compact and moreover
   deal with traffic passing over some of the
   most important lines in the area.

   Railway Repair Shops    Speldorf   (3)
    The repair shops, including two round-
   houses, are situated 1 mile West of
   Mülheim main station, immediately South
   of the marshalling yards. These are the
   only shops in the Reichsbahn-Direktion
    Essen which deal exclusively with the
   repair of steam locomotives. 1 ,600
   workers were employed here before the war.

  Public Utility Services

   Municipal Gas Works     Mülheim  (3)
    The works are situated 1^ miles North
    East of the main station and obtain their
   supplies from the Ruhr gas grid. 335
   million cubic feet of gas were bought and
   sold in 1937.

- 485 -

 

  Solid Fuels

   Friedrich Wilhelm     Mülheim  (3)
    Owned by Deutsche Eisenwerke A.G-, the coking
    plant Friedrich Wilhelmis situated within
    the steelworks complex, ^m. North-west of
    Mülheim station There are 80 ovens having
    an estimated annual dry coal capacity of
    182,000 tons Coal is obtained from local
    sources.

   Rosenblumendelle & Wiesche collieries Heissen    (3)
    Owned by Mülheimer Bergwerke A. G. (Hugo Stinnes)
    the collieries are situated about 3 miles
    E. N. E. of Mülheim station and about £ mile
    South-East of Heissen station. The combined
    output of the two collieries was 1,112,000 tons
    of hard coal in 1937. They have their own
    power station with an estimated capacity of
    12 MW.

   Kaiser Wilhelm Institut für Kohlenforschung     Mülheim (-)

    Mülheimis distinguished by the presence
    there of the K.W. I. für Kohlenforschung,
    until recently directed by Prof. Fr. Fischer.
    The most notable achievement of this highly-
    important research establishment has been
    the development of the various synthetic
    processes known collectively under the name
    of Fischer-Tropsch.

  Iron and Steel and Ferro-Alloys

   Stahl-und Walzwerke, Thyssen   Mülheim  (2)
    Owned by the Deutsche Röhrenwerke A.G. group
    of Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G, , this works
    is situated immediately North-East of the
    Friedrich Wilhelmshütte and 1 mile North-
    East of Mülheim main station. There are 11
    open-hearth furnaces having an estimated
    annual crude-steel capacity of 200,000 tons.
    In addition to the usual range of products,
    the works specialises in boilers, and is
    also engaged in sheet welding and zinc
    working. Some 10,000 workers are said to
    be employed. The works has its own power
    station with a capacity of 12 MW.

- 486 -

 

   Friedrich Wilhelmshütte    Mülheim  (3)
    Owned by the Deutsche Eisenwerke A.G-,
   group of Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G. , the
   works is situated half-a-mile North-
   west of Mülheim main station on the
   northern bank of the river Ruhr, There
   are A- blast furnaces with an estimated
   annual capacity of 350,000 tons of pig
   iron. The firm specialises in engine
   castings. For details of the coking
   plant see under “ S. F. ”, Combined
   with the Schalken Verein works at
   Gelsenkirchen, the estimated capacity
   of blast-furnace cement in 1939 was
   600,000 tons. The works has its own
   power station with a capacity of 13 W.

  Engineering and Armaments

   Siemens Schuckertwerke A.G'    Mülheim  (3)
    Situated half a mile W. N. W. of Mülheim
   main station, the works covers an area
   of 860,000 sq. ft. It was one of the
   principal manufacturers of steam turbines
   for driving generators and produced approx, 38%
   of the total German output in 1937 Generators,
   turbo-pumps and condenser units were also
   made. There is some doubt as to the present
   rate and type of activity at this works and
   it is believed that it may be partly inactive.


MÜHLHEIM (Rhineland)
 

    This, an Eastern suburb of Cologne, is described
  under “Köln am Rhein (Cologne)⁴. It should not be confused
  with Mülheim, a town of 136,000 inhabitants in the Ruhr, which
  is described above.

- 487 -

MÜNCHEN (Bavaria) 
48° 10' N. 11° 35' E:  570 miles: (825,000)

   Munich (Munchen)
is the largest city in Bavaria and the fourth
  largest in Germany. Prior to 1933 it was the seat of the Bavarian
  Government. Munich is the birthplace of the Nazi Movement and has
  become the headquarters of the Nazi Party.
   The city is in the Bavarian highlands, and is 1,700 feet above
  sea level. It lies to the North of the foothills of the Bavarian
  Alps, and is on the River Isar. Munich is the centre of an
  important network of railways and has direct connection with France
  (through Strassburg), with Austria (through Rosenheim), and with
  Italy (through Innsbruck and the Brenner Pass).
   Munich was the residence of the Kings of Bavaria. It is a
  university town, and a cultural centre of European importance.
  Traditionally the city has long been celebrated for artistic handi-
  crafts, including bronze founding, glass staining, silversmith's
  work, and wood carving, in addition to the manufacture of astron-
  omical and mathematical in st imments. During the present century
  a big development of Munich³s engineering industry has taken place,
  and there are now several large works, which are of the highest
  value to Germany's war production, making railway locomotives,
  aircraft and other engines, chemicals, and rubber tyres. The
  larger of these firms are mentioned below, including the E: M.W.
  aero-engine works and the four plants now established in Munich by
  the Dornier concern. In addition to these, there are reports of
  further new aircraft and aero-engine factories having been opened
  in the Munich area by Messerschmitt and Daimler-Benz,
   Also included in the Munich area are the Oberwiesenfeld air-
  field district North-west of Munich (where the B.M.W. and other
  works are situated), the suburbs of Moosach to the North East,
  Pasing to the West and Höllriegelskreuth which lies about 5 miles
  South of Munich. Wolfratshausen, 18 miles South of Munich, where
  there is a large explosives factory and a reported new Dornier
  plant, is described under its own heading.

  Transportation

   Railway Centre     Munich  (2)
    Munich is a focal point in the German railway
    system. The terminal railway station is
    situated on the Western side of the city
    centre. Direct trunk lines radiate to the North and
    North-west Germany via Nürnberg; to North-
    eastern Germany and to Czechoslovakia; to
    Vienna via Braunau and via Salzburg; to the
    South via Rosenheim and also via Mittenwald
    to Innsbruck and the Brenner Pass; South
    westwards to Lindau, Friedrichshafen and
    Switzerland; and to the West via Augsburg
    to the Upper Rhine Valley and Strassburg.
    Several minor branch lines lead Southward
    from Munich and serve the Upper Bavarian
    highlands. The main station is fully
    electrified, as are all but one of the main
    lines that radiate from Munich.

- 488 -

 

 Marshalling Yards      Munich  (3)
  The chief marshalling yards lie to the West
  of the main railway station and had in 1938
  a capacity for handling 3,000 wagons per 24
  hours The yard is fully electrified

 Goods Yards       Munich  (3)
  In addition to the large goods station
  adjoining the main passenger station, there
  are also goods yards with extensive storage
  facilities adjacent to the three suburban
  stations; München-Nord, München-Ost and
  Mftnchen-SÜd

 Marshalling Yards      München (Ost) (3)
  These yards, which lie to the East of the
  town, had a capacity for handling 2,000
  wagons per 24 hours in 1938.

 Railway Repair Shops    Freimann   (1)
  These are extensive railway-repair shops
  which undertake the repair of main-line
  locomotives, Diesel and electric loco-
  motives, goods wagons, heavy trucks, and
  trailers. Some 4,600 workers are believed
  to be employed. The shops are situated in
  the suburb of Freimann 3 miles North of the
  city centre, and are believed to be the largest
  of their kind in Southern Geimany.

 Railway Repair Shops    Neuaubing   (3)
  The railway workshops at Neuaubing 4 miles
  West of Munich are situated immediately to
  the West of the Dornier plant mentioned below.
  They undertake the repair of passenger coaches and
  goods wagons and employ some 2500 workers.

 Railway Repair Shops    Munich  (3)
  These are medium-sized repair shops situated
  immediately to the West of the main railway
  station.

 Public Utility Services

  Power Station     Isartal  (2)
  This thermal power station is situated
  between the Isartal Strasse and the Schäft-
  larnstrasse in the South of Munich. The
  installed capacity is 85 MW but the final
  capacity of the station is planned to be
  100 MW. The station is believed to be
  connected to ocher stations owned by the
  Munich Cox'poration.
  A substation is attached and connects the
  power station with tue Ampen werke A.G. and
  the Bayernwerke A.G. grids,

- 489 -

 

  Hydro Sc deme      Middle Isar (1)
  Hydro Scheme     Uppenborn (1)

   These electric power systems utilise the
    water power of the River Isar and consist
    of two groups of hydro-electric power
    stations situated to the North-east of
    Munich. Two diversionary canals are used.
    Seven miles North-east of Munich the Isar
    is diverted into a large reservoir fron
    which a aanal has been cut to rejoin the
    river 18 miles to the North near Moosburg.
    The four power stations of this (the
    Middle Isar) group are at Finsing where
    the canal leaves the reservoir at Aufkirchen,
    at Eitting, and at Pfrombach.
   The capacities of these stations are 11,
    J6, 32, and 28 MW. respectively.
   Between Munich and Moosburg the Isar has
    a course of 32 miles and gives a 290
    head to this group of stations. The annual
    electrical output of the Middle Isar group
    is nearly 500 million kWh and is supplied
    in approximately equal parts to the State
    Railways and the city of Munich.
   From Moosburg to Landshut the canal is
    continued close to the right bank along a
    15-mile stretch of the river, giving a
    head of 60. This second and smaller group
    of power stations, known as the Uppenborn
    group, includes the old Uppenborn station
    of 8 MW., the new Uppenborn I of 28 MW.
    and the new Uppenborn II of 18 MW.

  Gasworks       Munich  (3)
   Tn 1936 the municipal gasworks of Muhich
    made 2,100 million cu. ft. of coal gas and
    bought a farther 100 million cu. ft. of
    sewage gas from the municipal sewage plant
    at Grosslappen.

 Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

  Bayerisches Leichtmetall Werk  Neu Freimann (2)
   The Bayerisches Leichtmetall Weik E.Heymann
    & H.Kayser produce aluminium castings and
    pressings etc. They are believed to be
    important suppliers of light-metal castings,
    pressings etc., to the German aircraft industry.

  Vordersteimann & Steitz   Dachauerstr. (3)

   This fim has an aluminium and silumin
    foundry and produces aluminium castings
    and pressings on a medium scale.

- 490 -

 

 Aircraft and Aero-Engines

 B.M.W.      Oberwiesenfeld (1)
   The main works of the Bayerische Motoren-
   werke A.G. are to the North of Munich close
   to the Oberwiesenfeld airfield. In 194-2
   some 5,000 workers were employed in this
   plant. In addition to the manufacture of
   aero-engines, these works also construct
   motorcycle combinations and various types of
   military transport. (See also below under
   E. and A.). The aero-engine section manufactures the
   14-cylinder radial B.M.W.-801 aero-engine on
   a considerable scale. There is also still
   seme production of the 9-cylInder B.M.W.-132.
   Research work on new types of engines is
   also carried out at the Oberwiesenfeld factory.
   The plant operates in conjunction with the
   works at Allach from which it receives a
   proportion of its components.

 B.M.W.      Allach  (1)
   The B.M.W. plant at Allach was erected in
   1941 and was designed to undertake the chief
   part of the serial production of aero-engines
   for this concern. The capacity was planned
   to reach 1,000 aero-engines per month, but
   nothing like this rate of output has ever
   been achieved and it is now believed that the
   works is largely engaged on the manufacture
   of aero-engine components for its own require-
   ments and for supply to other B.M.W. factories.
   Seven thousand workers are believed to be
   employed at this plant which also includes a
   large aero-engine repair department.

 Dornier (Assembly) 0berpfaffenhofen (2) 
 Bernier (Repairs) 0berpfaffenhofen (3) 
 Dornier       Neu Aubing (2)
   The chief Dornier assembly plant is on the
   Northern and Eastern sides of the airfield
   at Oberpfaffenhofen, 6 miles West of Munich.
   It is reported to employ some 5,000 workers,
   and assemble the Do. 217. A second Dornier
   factory in Oberpfaffenhofen is engaged
   entirely on repair work.
   The Dornier factory at Neu Aubing constructs
   major aircraft components, mainly fuselages
   and wings, which are supplied to the Ober-
   pfaffenhofen works for assembly. Neu Aubing
   is 5 miles to the West of Munich. The Dornier
   factory is situated East of the Neu Aubing
   railway repair shops.

- 491 -

 

  F.F.I.      Oberpfaffenhofen (3)
    The Flugfunkforschungsinstitut occupies the
    group of buildings on the western boundary
    of the Oberpfaffenhofen airfield . It is a
    radio and Hadar research and experimental
    laboratory engaged, among other things, on
    the development of airborne radio equipment.
    Towards the end of 1942 and at the beginning
    of 1943 experiments were being made in
    connection with a radio altimeter. The
    Institute was also working on the development
    of an automatic balloon-borne transmitter
    for meteorological work.

  Hans Häusler     Baierbrun   (3)
    The works of the Flugmotoren Reparaturwerk
    Hans Häusler are in Baierbrun, 6 miles to the
    South of Munich in the valley of the River
    Isar. They are reported to employ some
    2,003 workers on repairs of aero engines.

  Junkers G.m.b.H.     Allach  (2)
    The Junkers Motorenbau G.m.b.H. are engaged
    on the manufacture of Diesel engines and special
    components for submarines of which they are
    believed to be the leading Ge man makers.

 Engineering and Armaments

  Maffei      Allach  (1)
  Maffei      Munich  (3)
  Maffei      Freimann   (3)
    The Locomotivfabrik Krauss & Comp. J.A.Maffei
    AKG, are highly-important producers of steam
    and electric locomotives, turbines, compressed
    air hammers, stationary engines, and other
    heavy machine tools. They construct tractors
    from 5 tons upwards, and are also reported to
    supply locomotive components to Henschel,
    of Kassel. The output of locomotives from the
    Maffei works has been estimated as 48 monthly.
    They are now also engaged on the production of
    armoured vehicles and tanks.
    The main works of the Maffei concern, which
    alone are said to employ some 10,000 workers,
    including a proportion of foreign labourers,
    üßs immediately to the East of the railway
    station of Allach, an outlying suburb 4 miles
    to the North-west of the city centre. The
    second plant is situated in the city area
    immediately to the West of the main Munich
    goods station. The third plant, which is of
    recent construction, has been built in the
    Northern suburb of Freimann, 3 miles from the
    centre of the city,

- 492 -

 

Süddeutsche Bremse A.G.   Moosacherstr. (2)
 The Süddeutsche Bremse A.G. are mainly owned
 by the Knorr Bremse A.G. of Berlin, and
 normally produce railway vacuum brakes. Their
 works lie sin the suburb of Oberwiesenfeld near
 to the E:M. W. plant. It includes a large
 aluminium foundry. In 1930 the Süddeutsche
 Bremse took up the production of Diesel engines
 under licence from the Daimler Benz concern.
 They are now reported to be employing some
 6,000 workers, and to be building Diesel engines
 for tractors, tanks, lorries, and other types
 of heavy military transport. In 1943 it was
 reported that their production was especially
 concentrated on engines for tractors.

Rathgeber      Moosach  (2)
 The Waggonfabrik Jos.Rathgeber A.G. are important
 builders of railway goods wagons (including
 refrigerator wagons)
and heavy road vehicles'
 They are now reported to be constructing chiefly
 artillery tractors, limbers, and wireless
 trailers. Their works have been greatly extend-
 ed during recent years. 1500 workers were
 employed before the war, but this number will now
 have been much increased. The works lies close
 to the suburban railway station of Moosach,
 3 miles North-west of the city centre.

Hugo Kustermann     Rosenheimerstr.(2)
Anton Schlüter      Balanstr. (2)

 The Anton Schlüter Motorenfabrik were makers
 before the war of Diesel engines and pumps.
 Their works are in the South-east ein quarter
 of the town close to the foundry and iron
 works of Hugo Kustermann. These two firms
 are now believed to have been amalgamated, and
 have greatly enlarged their plant during the
 war. One section is reported to be making and
 assembling light tanks complete with engines.
 Another section manufactures shells (including
 A.A.) and hand grenades. Before the war some
 1,200 workers were employed by these two firms,
 but the number has now without doubt increased
 considerably.

B.M.W.      Oberwiesenfeld (2)
 A large section of the works of the Bayerische
 Motoren Werke (which are referred to above
 under Aircraft and Aero-Engines)
specialises
 in the production of motorcycle combinations
 for the German armed forces. Types are produced
 with 500 cc., 750'cc., and 1,000 cc., engines.
 It is reported that in January 1942 this section
 celebrated the completion of its 35,000th
 machine since the outbreak of war.

- 493 -

 

   Friedrich Deckel     Sendling   (2)
   The works of this film are in Sendling,
   a suburb 2 miles South of the city centre.
   They make fuel-injection pumps, profiling
   and engraving machines, and photographic
   shutters. One section is devoted to the
   manufacture of precision-grinding apparatus.
   In 1943 it was reported that 1,800 workers
   were employed by this firm.

   Optische Werke G.Rodenstock   Isartalstr. (3)
   This firm produces photographic lenses,
   binoculars, naval telescopes, and surveying
   instruments. Some 600 workers are reported'
   to,be employed.

   Carl Hdrth      Holzstr.   (3)
   The Carl Hdrth Maschinen- & Zahnradfabrik
   are makers of gears and complete transmission
   units for motor vehicles. They also produce
   grinding machines and other precision machine
   tools.

   I. G. Farbenindustrie A.G. Camera-Werk Giesing,  (3)
   These works, which belong to the I.G. Farben
   concern, normally produce the cheaper types
   of Agfa camera. They are now believed to be
   engaged on producing photographic appliances
   for the armed forces.

   Siemens Schuckert    Munich  (3)
   The former premises of the Isaria Werke A.G.
   have now been- taken over by the Siemens
   Schuckert concern, and are being used for
   the production of power units for the Siemens
   automatic pilot. Some 1,200 workers are
   said to be employed here.

   Askania       Munich  (-)

   The Askania Werke A.G-. of Berlin, makers of
   optical and precision instruments, have now
   established a large factory in Munich which
   is reported to employ several thousand workers.
   The exact location of this plant in the Munich
   area is not known, and it is possible they
   have taken over the premises of an existing
   firm. The Munich plant is reported to be
   manufacturing chiefly autanatic pilots,
   compasses, and turn indicators. The works are
   said to occupy a site of 70,000 sq. metres,
   and to include an assembly workshop building
   five storeys high.

- 494 -

 

  Metall Papier      Eisenheimerstr.  (3)

    The Metall Papier Bronzefarben Blattmetal
    Werke A.G. are reported to employ approxi-
    mately 1,000 workers and are makers of
    gold, silver, aluminium and copper foil.

 Chemicals and Explosives

  Dynamit A.G.     Buchberg   (-)

    According to ground reports the Dynamit
    A.G. have erected a fairly large explosives .
    works in the neighbourhood of Buchberg
    where in 1942 some 5,000 workers were reported
    to be employed.

  Dynamit A.G.     Wolfratshausen (3)
    This is a large and very widely dispersed'
    plant probably wo iking in conjunction with
    the works at Buchberg. Ground reports
    suggest that the Wolfratshausen undertaking
    employs some 5,-6,000 workers.

  Dynamit A'G.      Kaufbeuren  (3)
    A further plant of the Dynamit A.G. is
    reported to have been erected 3km. North-
    west of Kaufbeuren and is said to cover an
    area of 7 4 km. The reports suggest that
    in May 1943 some 2,000 workers were employed
    on the production of explosives.

  Gesellschaft für Linde's Eismaschinen Höllriegelskreuth (2)
    This is the parent works of the Wiesbaden
    firm which also has factories at Aschaffen-
    burg, Fürth, Augsburg, Nuremberg, Vienna,
    and a number of other towns in Germany.
    The Höllriegelskreuth works is mainly
    engaged in research and development in
    connection with refrigeration, liquefaction
    of air and gases, preservation of F.,
    etc. The works is also engaged on the
    construction of apparatus and plant (mainly
    of proto-types only) for the production of
    synthetic ammonia, purification and drying
    of gas mixtures, electrolytic oxygen
    production plant, etc.
    Apart fran their own laboratories at
    Höllriegelskreuth, Linde also use the
    laboratories situated within the works area
    of the Electrochemischewerke Mönchen A.G.
    whose work's is practically adjacent to the
    Linde plant. (See below)

- 495 -

 

   Elect rochemischewerke München A.G. Höllriegelskreuth (2)
   This works occupies an area of 1,200 x
   350 and prior to the war was mainly
   engaged on the production of hydrogen
   peroxide and derivatives. Little is known
   regarding this firms present activities
   but it is known that the works has been
   enlarged since the outbreak of war and it
   is believed to be fully active. (See also
   above under Linde).


   Wacker G.m.b.H.      Prinz Regenten Str.   (3)
   The Dr.Alexander Wacker Gesellschaft für
   Elektrochemische Industrie G.m.b.H. are an
   important chemical factory, among their
   products being calcium carbide, chlorinated
   hydro-carbons and chlorine compounds, butyl
   alcohol, synthetic shellac, ethyl and methyl
   acetate, acetylene, and cellulose acetate.
   Prior to the war Wacker was believed to be
   the principal German producer of some of these
   products. Some 1,000 workers are believed
   to be employed at the Munich factory. The
   firm's main works is at Burghausen, 60 miles
   East of Munich and close to the former
   Austrian border.

   Rheinpreussen     Lindwurmstr. (3)
   The Rheinpreussen G.m.b.H. make a glycerine
   substitute which is used extensively in the
   textile industry and for glossing and finishing
   in the rubber, plastics, leather and paper
   industries; and also as glue, dye and varnish.

   Hauff A.G.      Feuerbach   (3)
   The firm of Hauff A.G. is one of the better-
   known German producers of photographic film
   and paper. They manufacture plates, films,
   and photographic chemicals.

   Krauseder & Cie. A.G.     Munich   (-)

   The Trockenplattenfabrik, Krauseder & Cie.
   A.G. are well-known producers of photographic
   plates and films.

 Rubber and Tyres

   Metzeler       'Westendstr.  (2)
   Prior to the war the Metzeler Gummiwerke
   A.G. were manufacturers primarily of motor-
   cycle tyres and tyres for small cars. They
   were the principal source of the motorcycle
   and sidecar tyres used by the B.M.W. works
   and their production of these was estimated
   at 12,000 tyres and tubes per month.


- 496 -


    They also made bicycle tyres and tubes
    in quantities, it is reported, as high
    as 50,000 a month. The plant has been
    partly converted to heavier types of tyres
    and it is believed that at present the
    output consists mainly of truck and motor
    tyres, which are being made at an estimated
    rate of 10,000 per month. In addition a
    very small number of aero-tyres are made
    here. Among other mechanical rubber goods
    the plant has a considerable output of
    rubber hose.

Foodstuffs


   Kathreiner       Mühldorfstr. (-)

    The Franz Kathreiner Nachf. A.G. are makers
    of malt coffee-substitute. They are the most
    important producers of this product in Germany.
    They employed some 800 workers before the war.
    Adjoining their factory in the Eastern quarter
    of Munich are large warehouses belonging to
    the Bavaria Lagerhaus & Transport G.m.b.H,

   Tivoli       Jenserstr.  (-)

    The Kunstmühie Tivoli A.G. own lai^e flour
    mills with grain-storage facilities for up
    to 20,000 tons. Their premises are situated
    near the Langefled Platz between the Isar
    and the large park known as the Englischer
    Garten.

- 497 -

MÜNCHEN/GLADBACH (Rhineland)
51° 15' N. 6° 25' E:  285 miles: (130,000)

  München-Gladbach is 15 miles West of Düsseldorf, and is one of
the chief centres of the Rhineland textile industry. There are a
great number of spinning and weaving mills, cloth and clothing
factories in the town, but it is believed that a large part of their
trade was transferred early in the war to the textile districts in
Saxony and Eastern Germany. The town's activity also include' a
number of engineering works, some of which are mentioned below.
München-Gladbach is a railway junction of importance to the Lower
Rhineland, and two main traffic routes pass through the town.

 Transportation

 Railway Junction      Mttnchen-Gladbach (3)
  The direct lines to Aachen from the Ruhr and
  from Düsseldorf and the Wuppertal area meet
  at München-Gladbach, and lead thence to
  Aachen, 35 miles to the Southwest. , The main
  line from Düsseldorf to Venlo and Southern
  Holland leads Northwestwards from München-
  Gladbach. A further branch line connects the
  town directly with Köln, 30 miles to the South-
  East. There are marshalling yards and a
  goods station to the East of the main
  railway station.

 Public Utility Services

 Gasworks      M. -Gladbach (3)
  In 1936 the municipal gasworks at M. -Gladbach
  made 270 mill. cu. ft. of gas.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Meer A.G      Karmannstr. (3)
  The Maschinenfabrik Meer A.G. , a subsidiary
  of the Mannesmann-Röhren concern of
  Düsseldorf, has a plant in München-Gladbach
  which employed some 700 workers before the
  war. They construct rolling-mill machinery
  for iron and steel tubes, steam and lydraulic
  presses, pumps and compressors of all kinds.

 A. Montforts      München -Gladbach (3)
  This firm normally makes textile machinery,
  particularly combing, cutting and finishing
  machines. They are now reported to be making
  components for small arms.

 W. Schlafhorst     Blumenbergeratr. (3)

  This firm, which makes textile machinery,
  employed some 700 workers before the war.


- 498 -


MÜNSTER (Westphalia)
52° N. 7° 40' E:   335 miles: (143,000)

 Münster is the chief town and administrative centre of
Westphalia and is an important railway Junction. The Dortmund-Ems
Canal passes through the town, (which has an inland harbour)
and
some 5 miles to the North, is carried over the River Ems by means
of a large aqueduct. There are a variety of industries which
include flour milling, agricultural machinery, and dye works. None
of these is of outstanding importance.

 Transportation

 Inland Harbour and Aqueducts    Münster  (2)
  The inland harbour is in the South-eastern
  quarter of the town, and consists of a
  dock basin leading out of the Dortmund-Ems
  Canal. Five miles to the North of Münster
  this Canal crosses the River Ems by means
  of two aqueducts, the newer and larger of
  which is built of reinforced concrete in
  three spans, and has a total length of
  426 feet with a width of 98 feet .

 Railway Junction      Münster  (2)
  Münster is 20 miles North of Hamm, and
  an important railway line runs from Hamm
  through Münster to Join the main railway
  from North Germany into Holland at Rheine
  25 miles to the North. A second main line
  leads from Osnabrück through Münster to
  Wesel and the Lower Rhineland. A branch
  line connects Münster direct with Gronau
  to the North West, and two further branch lines
  with the Eastern part of Westphalia.

 Railway Repair Shops    Münster  (3)
  These are medium-sized repair shops which
  undertake the repair mainly of goods
  wagons.

 Public Utility Services

 Gasworks      Münster  (3)
  In 1936 the Münster-municipal gasworks
  bought 380 million cu. ft. of gas for
  re-sale from the Radbod coking plant of
  the Hoesch-KÖln-Neussen A.G.

- 499 -

NAUMBURG (Province Saxony)
51° 10' N. 11° 50' E: 515 miles:  (35,000)

   Naumburg is on the River Saale 25 miles South-west of
 Halle and on the main railway line through Erfurt to Frankfurt
 a. Main and South-west Germany, The industiy normally comprises
 textiles, mostly hosiery and knitted goods, furniture making,
 and a few specialised manufactures, such as combs and millinery
 articles.

 Transportation

    Railway Repair Shops   Naumburg  (3)
   These are medium-sized repair shops
   undertaking the repair of goods wagons.




NECKARSULM (Wurttemburg)
See under HEILBRONN


NEHEIM (Westphalia)
51° 25' N. 7° 55' E: 350 miles: (53,000)

   N.heimis 15 miles South-east of Hamm and on the Upper
 reaches on the River Ruhr. It is on the border of the hilly
 district of Southern Westphalia known as the Sauerland. The
 town has a considerable light metal-ware industiy and specialises
 in peacetime in the manufacture of lamp brackets and lighting
 fixtures. There are a large number of factories and workshops
 in this trade, but none is of importance.

NEISSE (Silesia)
50° 30' N. 17° 20' E: 760 miles:   (35,000)


   Neisse is 30 miles South-west of Oppeln and within 5 miles
 of the Czechoslovakian frontier. It is a market town and the
 centre of an agricultural district. In peacetime there are a
 large number of bakeries specialising in a popular confectionery
 product (Honigkuchen). There is one engineering firm which is
 mentioned below, but otherwise no industiy of importance.



- 500 -

 Engineering am Armaments

   Hahn & Koplowitz Neisse (3)
   The Neisser Eisenengiesserei & Maschinenbauanstalt
   Hahn & Koplowitz Nachf., who appear to have increased
   their trade considerably in the years preceding 1939,
   are makers of lathes, boring and grinding machinery,
   and other machine tools. They were employing some
   800 workers at the outbreak of war.



NEUBRANDENBURG (Mecklenburg)
53° 35' N. 13° 15' E:   580 miles: (22,000)

  Neubrandenburg is in the Eastern part of Mecklenburg 60 miles
  North of Berlin. It is on the main line from Berlin to Stralsund,
  and is a railway junction of considerable local importance.
  Mecklenburg is a valuable agricultural district and Neubrandenburg
  is one of the chief market centres, in particular for cattle.
  Apart from the firms mentioned below there are no important
  industries.

  Aircraft and Aero-Engines

   R. Rinker G.m.b.H.     Neubrandenburg (3)
   The Richard Rinker G.m.b.M normally construct
   wooden agricultural appliances, but are now
   reported to be employing approximately 1 ,000
   workers on the construction of wooden components
   for aircraft

  Engineering and Armaments

   Lythall K.G.      Neubrandenburg (3)
   The Maschinenfabrik Lythall K.G. are makers of
   agricultural machinery. They are now reported
   to be employing several thousand workers on the
   manufacture of munitions, including bomb oasings
   and racks, and hand grenades.


NEU-ISENBURG (Hesse)
50° 5' N. 8° 45' E:  400 miles:  (15,000)

  Neu Isenburg is 4 miles South of Frankfurt a. Main on the
  Southern edge of the forest known as the Frankfurter Stadtwald.
  There are a number of furniture factories, but no industries
  which are individually of importance.



- 501 -

NEUMÜNSTER (Schleswig Holstein)
54° 5' N. 10° E:   460 miles:  (52,000)

  Neunfinster is 20 miles South of Kiel of the main line from
  Hamburg to Kiel It is in the centre of the rich agricultural
  district of Holstein, and is an important corn and cattle market.
  Tanning and the preparation of leather are the main industries.

  Transportation

   Railway Junction      Neunfinster (3)
   The main line from Hamburg divides into two at
   Neunfinster, one branch leading Northwest to
   Flensburg, and the second due North to Kiel,
   Four other branch lines radiate from the town
   and serve the district of Holstein.

   Railway Repair Shops    Neunfinster (3)
   These are medium-sized repair shops which undertake
   the repair of passenger coaches and goods wagons.
   Approximately 1 ,000 workers are enployed.

  Aircraft and Aero-Engines

   Leiohtbau G-.rn.b4i.    Sedanstr. (3)

   The Neunfinster works of the Land & See Leiohtbau
   G.m.b.H. ar° reported to be making tail units and
   components for He.111. They also undertake the
   repair of aircraft.

  Leather

   Adler & Oppenheimer A.G.    Neunfinster (3)
   The Adler & Oppenheimer A.G. are an inportant
   leather concern which enployed some 2,000
   workers in i 939 on the tanning and preparation
   of all kinds of leather. Their factories are at
   Neunfinster, and at Neustadt-Olewe in Mecklenburg.

   H.G. Schmid       Neumünster (3)
   The firm of Herman G. Schmid is an important
   producer of sole leather.


NEUNKIRCHEN (Saar)
49° 20' N. 7° 10' E:  355 miles: (41,000)
  Neunkirchen is in the Eastern part of the Saar coal mining area
  and is 15 miles North-east of Saarbrücken. There are several large
  coal mines near to this town. The main industry in the town itself
  is the large iron and steel works mentioned below. Neunkirchen is
  on a main line leading from Hamburg to Saarbrücken and is the
  Junction for an inportant branch leading North to Ottweiler and St.
  Wendel.


- 502 -


 Public Utility Services


Gasworks Neunkirchen (3)

 The municipal gasworks in 1936 made 130 million
 cu. ft' of gas and bought for resale a further 65
 million cu. ft' from the Neunkirchener Eisenwerk
 (See under S. F. ).


 Solid Fuels


Grube Heinitz Neunkirchen (2)

 This coal mine, which together with the other mines
 in the Saar territory, belongs directly to the German
 Governnent and is administrated by the official
 Saargruben Verwaltung, has six pit heads. The i 937
 output was 1,700,000 tons. There is a coking and
 by-products plant attached to the mine. There are
 129 coke ovens and in i 937 the plant had an esti-
 mated dry coal capacity of 900,000 tons.

  Grube Reden     Neunkirchen (3)
  Grube Neunkirchen      Neunkirchen (3)
  Grube Frankenholz    Neunkirchen (3)

 These three mines, each of which has three pitheads
 in 1937F had an output of 1500,000, 1,200,000 and
 600,000 tons of coal respectively.

  Neunkirchener Eisenwerk A.G.   Neunkirchen (3)
 Lying 1 m. West of Neunkirchen town, the coking
 plant attached to this steelworks has 140 ovens,
 and an estimated annual dry coal capacity of 1,117,000
 tons per annum (See also under Iron and Steel).

  Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys

  Neunkirchener Eisenwerke   Neunkirchen (2)
 The Neunkirchener Eisenwerke A.G. vorm. Gebrüder
 Stummis an important and very old-established iron
 and steel works. Before the war some 7,000 workers
 were employed and this number is now reported to have
 been considerably increased. There are six blast
 furnaces, four Bessemer converters, four open-hearth
 and three cupola furnaces, and the capacity is estimated
 as 700,000 tons of steel per annum.



- 503 -


NEURUPPIN (Brandenburg)
52° 55' N. 12° 50' E:   555 miles: (24,000)


  Neuruppin- is 35 miles North-west of Berlin and at the northern
end of the Ruppiner See, one of the larger of the many lakes of the
northern Brandenburg and Mecklenburg district. In peacetime it is
a popular tourist resort, and specialises in various minor industries,
including lithography and picture frame making. An aircraft
experimental station is reported to be now established at Neuruppin.


 Aircraft and Aero-Engines


 Glider Works      Neuruppin (-)
    '
  An aircraft plant is believed to have been
  built at Neuruppin which in was reported
  to be constructing and experimenting with
  giant transport aircraft of limited range
  but great carrying capacity.

NEUSALZ (Silesia)
51° 50' N. 15° 45' E:  680 miles: (18,000)

  Neusalz is in the northern area of Lower Silesia, 60 miles
North-west of Liegnitz. In addition to being an important agricultural
centre, Neusalz has considerable industry, which includes textiles
and engineering works.

 Engineering and Armaments

  Krause Werke      Neusalz  (3)
  The Krause Werke Gm.b. H. employed sane 1,200
  workers before the war, and are makers of pimps,
  ‘iron drainage pipes, stable fittings, wagon
  parts and other building and agricultural
  requirements.

  Paulinenhfttte Mohr & Co.   Neusalz  (3)
  The K.G' Eisenhütte & Emaillierwerk Paulinen-
  hfttte Mohr & Co. have a large iron foundry,
  and in peace time produce stoves, domestic
  ovens, and enamelled goods.

 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

 Gruschwitz Textil Werke     Neusalz  (3)
  The Gruschwitz Textil Werke A.Gk are cotton
  and flax spinners. Their mill at Neusalz
  has 50,000 spimiles and in 1938 employed some
  3,000 workers. They are large producers
  of sewing thread and cotton.

- 504 -

NEUSS (Rhineland)
51° 12' N. 6° 42' E:   290 miles: (62,072)

 Neuss, which lies South-west and within the administrative
area of Düsseldorf, is on the western bank of the Shine, and is of
some importance as an inland harbour. All the normal industries of
a pert- such as flour milling, food and oil storage, etc. are carried
on here, and, in addition, the most important factory in Germany producing
nuts and bolts is situated at Neuss. Other industries include the
manufacture of radiators, sanitary fittings, and agricultural machinery.
The area under consideration extends for about 7 square miles,

 Transportation

 Railway Junction and Marshalling Yards Neuss   (3)

  The Neuss marshalling yards lie to the North
  and South of Neuss main station and form an
  important traffic-centre, having a capacity to
  deal with 2,200 wagons per 2k- hours. To the
  North of the marshalling yards lies the junction
  of the lines to Krefeld, Düsseldorf, München-
  Gladbach, Aachen and Köln, and to the South
  lies the Junction of the lines to MBnchen-
  Gladbach, Aachen and Köln.

 Inland Port      Neuss   (3)

  Situated on the East of the town, with a water-
  front of 16,000 metres, this harbour is of some
  importance, since it is the traffic port of
  Aachen, München-Gladbach, Rehdt, Jülich,
  Stolberg, and Grevenbroich. Plant includes
  facilities for storage, various types of
  elevators, 7 electric cranes, 7 electric loading
  bridges, gas-oil bunkering stations etc. The
  harbour has its own tug service and in 1938
  had an incoming traffic of 956,000 tons and an
  outgoing traffic of 495,000 tons.

 Public Utility Services

 Städtische Gas-u. Elektrizitätswerke Neuss    (3)

  The Neuss Municipal Gasworks, which is situated
  on the Rheintorstrasse. West of harbour I.
  bought 660,000,000 cubic feet of gas from the
  Ruhrgas A.G' for resale in 1936. Also included
  on the site is a small electricity substation.

 R.W.E. Transformer Station   Neuss   (3)

  This transformer station lies at the southern
  end of harbour III and North of the Nationale
  Radiator Company.

- 505 -

 

 Engineering and Armaments


International Harvester¹ Co G. m.b, H, Neuss (2)

    This branch of the American firmis believed
    to employ nearly 4,000 workers on the manu-
    facture of KT. and tank components in
    addition to its normal range of agricultural
    machinery. Also attached to the site is a
    plant for the manufacture of binder-twine.
    The factory is situated between harbours I
    and II of the inland port of Neuss and there
    is a large storage depot on the opposite
    side of the harbour II,

Nationale Radiator G.m.b. H.  Neuss (3)
   Deutsche Standard für Sanitäre Anlagen Neuss (3)

    The two factories are operated by the
    Nationale Radiator G.m,b. H. , a subsidiary
    of the American Radiator and Standard
    Sanitary Corporation. They are almost
    adjacent and on the Eastern side of
   'Harbour II, The Nationale Radiator
    G.m.b. H. manufactures cast-iron radiators
    and malleable iron castings on a site of
    about twenty-four acres; the Deutsche
    Standard works manufactures sanitary
    installations of all types both of metal
    and vitreous china, on a site of about
    twenty-seven acres,

   Bauer & Schaurte      Neuss (3)

    lying almost due West of and adjoining
    the Neuss main station, this factory is
    the leading German manufacturer of nuts and
    bolts and probably the largest supplier of
    these to the Reichsbahn. The firm also
    Undertakes a limited production of small
    type machine tools. It was reported that
    60O-80O workers were employed in 1942.

   Peltz Gm.b.H.     Neuss  (-)

    This firm, which formerly employed over
    30O workers, is situated North-East of
    Neuss main station, adjoining the mar-
    shalling yards. The factory produces
    safes of all types.

   Holzbau A.. G'     Neuss (-)

    Situated between the International
    Harvester Co,'s Factory and the Rennplatz,
    this firm manufactures apparatus and all
    kinds of equipment for the erection of
    barracks and portable huts,

- 506 -

 

 Schraubenwerk Neuss Fissene & Co.   Neuss   (3)
  Situated on the Buderusehe Strasse 1 mile
  North of Neuss main station, the factory
  manufactures nuts and screws. In 194-3
  it was reported to be employing 820 workers
  and to be engaged on the production of bolts,
  rivets, and various small components for
  aircraft.

 Edelstahlwerk Düsseldorf-Heerdt G.m.b.H. Neuss    (-)

  Situated 1J miles North East of Neuss
  main station, this firmis one of 15 or
  20 other similar small plants in western
  Germany. It is a producer of crucible
  steel in small quantities for restricted
  specialised purposes, such as springs, etc.
  Many of these similar small firms are still
  privately owned.

 Heinrich Koppers G.m.b.H.   Neuss   (3)
  The silica works of this firm lies 2% miles
  North-east of Neuss main station. It is
  one of the principal German producers of
  silica refractories of all kinds and
  supplies industry, as well as Koppers own
  constructional activities (for coke ovens,
  etc. ).


 Chemicals and Explosives

 Chemische Fabrik Wesseling A.G.  Neuss   (3)
  The Neuss plant of this firmis situated
 1^ miles South-east of Neuss main station
 between the Kölner and Berghauschenstrassen.
 The factory occupies a fairly large site and
 manufactures sulphuric acid, bleaching powder
 and various ferro-cyanide compounds, partic-
 ularly for dyestuffs.

 Chemische Fabrik Niederrhein G.m.b.H. Neuss   (-)

   The works lies on the Eastern side of the
  Flosshafen, Igmilea North-east of the main station.
  It is engaged on the production of barium salts.

 Chemische Fabrik Dr. Kurt Albert Gm.b.H. Neuss   (-)

  The branch chemical works of Dr.Kurt Albert,
  G.m.b. H. , now known as Chemische Werke Albert
  A.G , whose main works are at Amöneburg bei
  Wiesbaden, are situated 2 miles South of Neuss
  main railway station. The firm manufactures
  copper sulphate, synthetic resins, and plastics.

- 507 -

 

Peter Cremer, Standard-Seifen u.   Heerdt
    Glyzerinwerke     Am Hochofen

    Soap, washing powders, and glycerine
    are manufactured by this firm, which
    lies two miles North-east of Neuss
    main station on the Western bank of
    the Erft canal.

- 508 -


NEUSTADT (Bavaria)
49° 20' 8° 10' E:   395 miles: (24,000)

 Neustadt an der Weinstrasse is 15 miles South-west of Ludwigshafen
in tlie Bavarian Palatinate. It is a railway junction of some local
importance. There is a small textile industry, but activity is mainly
connected with the wine-growing interests of this part of the Palatinate.

 

NEUSTADT-CLEWE (Mecklenburg)
53° 20' N. 11° 35' E:   515 miles (4,000)

 Neustadt-Cl ewe is 20 miles South of Schwerin in the eastern
area of Mecklenburg. The only industrial activity of note is a
leather-tanning factory.

 Leather

 Adler & Oppenheimer    Neustadt-Clewe (3)
  The Adler & Oppenheimer A.G-. are an important
  leather concern which employed some 2,000
  workers on the tanning and preparation of
  all kinds of leather. Their factories are
  at Neustadt-Clewe, and at Neumtmster in
  Schleswig-Holstein.




NEUSTETTIN (Pomerania)
53° 45' N. 16° 40' E:  720 miles: (20,000)

  Neustettin is in the South-eastern portion of Pomerania and is
the market town for a large agricultural district. There are no
industries wortty of special mention.

 


NEUSTRELITZ (Mecklenburg)
53° 20' N. 13° 5' E:   570 miles: (24,000)

 Neustrelitz is 60 miles North of Berlin and on the main lines from
Berlin to Bostock and to Stralsund, which diverge at Neustrelitz.
It is the market town and administrative centre for the agricultural
district of eastern Mecklenburg. There is no industry of importance.

 Transportation

 Railway Repair Shops    Neustrelitz (3)
  These are medium sized repair shops for
  the repair of goods wagons.

- 509 -


NEUWIED (Rhineland)
50° 25' N° 7° 25' E: 340 miles: (25,000)


  Neuwied is on the right bank of the Rhine seven miles
  downstream from Koblenz The industries include the manufacture
  of tiles and building materials from the porous stone quarried
  in this neighbourhood, and there is a large iron works



 Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys

  Rasselsteiner Eisenwerke Ges' A. G. Rasselstein (2)
   This firm, now absorbed by the Otto
   Wolff group, is situated one mile
   outside Neiwied at Rasselstein in the
   valley of the Wied, a small tributary
   of the Rhine' Before the war, some
   3,000 workers were employed and the
   firm claimed to be the oldest tinplate
   factory in Germany' The plant includes
   a steel foundry, 3 open-hearth furnaces,
   an annealing furnace, and sheet and
   cold rolling mills' The whole process
   from steel-making to tinning is under-
   taken. The annual crude steel capacity
   of the plant is estimated at 150,000 tons'



NIEDERMARSBERG
51° 28' N. 8° 52' E: 390 miles (5,800)

 Niedermarsiberg lies approximate 20 miles West of
Warburg, on the right bank of the river Diemel, a
tributary on the Weser. It has no industries of any
importance, other than a copper-smelting plant.



 Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication  

 Arbeitsgemeinschaft Stadtberger Kupferhütte G. m.b.H. Niedermarsberg (3)  


  This is a smelting plant for the treatment
   of ores from the Grube Oskar mine, near
   Stadtberge. It has an annual output of
   about 8,000 tons of blister copper.



NIENBURG a.d. WESER
52° 38'N 9° 13' E:   MO miles (12,000)

 Nienburg lies on the right bank of the River Weser,
about 22 miles North of Minden. It is a small town,
with little industry of any importance.




- 510 -



 Chemicals and Explosives

 Kali Chemie A.G' (Egerstorff' s Salzwerke-u Chemische Fabrik) (3)

  The Nienburg works of the Kali Chemie A.G
  Berlin manufactures sulphuric acid and soda ash
  products. This plant is reported to have a
  capacity for the production of over 20,000 tons
  of 100% sulphuric acid per annum by the lead-
  chamber process.



NIESKY (O/LAUSITZ)
51° 17' N. 14° 50' E: 645 miles: (7,800)

 lying about 15 miles North-west of Gorlitz, this small town is
on the main road from Gori it z to Forst. There is only one factory
of any size in the town.

 Christoph u Unmack A.G     Niesky  (3)
  This is a wood and jaetal-working firm with
  branch factories at Kaischewen and Berlin.
  The Niesky works specialise in the manufacture
  of wooden buildings, and also produce a small
  number of wagons, trailers, boilers, etc. In
  1939, 800 workers were employed at Niesky.

 

NORDENHAM (Oldenburg)
53° 30' N. 8° 30' E:    390 miles: (20,000)

 Nordenhamis a small port on the left bank of the Weser 4 miles
upstream from Bremerhaven. It is principally a fishing harbour and
the headquarters of the Midgard fishing concern.

 Liquid Fuels and Substitutes

 Oil Storage       Blexen  (3)

  There are large oil storage installations both
  at Blexen, 4 miles downstream from Nordenham,
  and in Nordenhamitself. The Blexen tanks have
  a capacity for 150,000 tons, and the Nordenham
  tanks for 90,000 tons.

 Non-ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

 Metallwerke Unterweser A.G.   Ncrdenham(Oldenburg) (3)
  This plant is engaged on the working of ores
  and the manufacture of chemicals, including the
  production of sulphuric acid. In 1937 their
  estimated output of lead was 8,000 tons, of zinc
  20,000 tons and of sulphuric acid J2,000 tons.



 

- 511 -

 

 Aircraft and Aero-Engines

   Weser Flugzeugbau     Blexen (3)
    The Weser Flugzeugbau G.m.b.H. employ some
    1500 workers mainly on the repair of flying
    boats' Their works are at the seaplane
    base on the left bank of the Weser 4 miles
    to the North of Nordenhamin the suburb of
    Blexen'

 Shipbuilding

   Midgard        Nordenham (-)

    The Midgard Deutsche Seeverkehrs A.G. are
    the owners of a fleet of trawlers and
    auxiliary vessels and are important suppliers
    of fish to the German markets. Their
    headquarters and chief coaling station is at
    Nordenham where they own the jetties and
    port facilities.

 Engineering and Armaments

   Seekabelwerke       Nordenham (-)

    The Norddeutsche Seekabelwerke A.G., which
    is jointly owned by Felten und Guilleaume
    and Siemens und Halske, have their factory
    at Nordenham and in peacetime owned two
    cable-laying ships which operated from this
    port. They manufacture and carry out
    maintenance of deep-sea cables; in 1939
    employed some 400 workers.





NORDHAUSEN (province Saxony)
51° 30' N. 10° 50' E:   470 miles: (38,000)


  Nordhausen is in the Southern area of the Hartz Mountains,
 and is 60 miles West of Halle on the railway line from Halle to
 Kassel. It is a market centre for the agricultural district which
 lies between the Hartz Mountains and the Thüringer Wald, and it is
 a tourist resort for the Southern Hartz. The town has largely
 preserved its mediaeval character. There are several furniture
 factories, printing works, and a small textile industry. The
 engineering industry of the town has specialised in the making of
 mining equipment and pumping installations, and the chief firms
 engaged cn this work are mentioned below.

      

- 512 -
 


Mabag Rothenburg Str. (3)

Tiefbau A.G Rothenburg Str. (3)

Deutsche Schachtbau A.G. Rothenburg Str. (3)

 The Mabag Maschinen & Apparatebau A. G., the
 Tiefbau & Kälteindustrie A.G. vorm. Gebhardt &
 König, and the Deutsche Schachtau A.G. are three
 companies which belong to the Deutsche Petroleum
 A.G. and its parent company the Deutsche Erdöl A.G.
 The Mabag are primarily makers of oil, gas, and
 water storage tanks, tank wagons, and similar
 installations. The works of the Tiefbau A.G.
 and of the Deutsche Schachtbau A.G., which
 construct oil-well boring equipment, in particular
  'shaft freezing" installations, are now operated by
 the Mabag. These companies undertake well-boring
 operations on behalf of their parent company which,
 in addition to its numerous brown-coal mines, is
 one of the chief undertakings concerned in the
 development of Germany's natural oil resources in
 the Hannover district and elsewhere. Some
 1,800 workers were employed by these
 three Nordhausen firms before the war.

Maschinen & BBhnbed&rf A. G.    Nordhausen (3)

 This firm was formerly known as the Orenstein &
 Koppel A.G. and in 1938 employed some 1,000
 workers on the manufacture of nArrow-gauge
 locomotives and rail car engines.

H. Anger & Söhne      Rothenburg Str. (-)

 This firm whose works adjoin those of the
 Mabag, makes pumping installations for mines
 and deep wells. Some 300 workers were employed
 before the war.

Schmidt, Kranz & Co. A.G.     Ullrichstr. (3)
 The Schmidt Kranz & Co. A.G. ("Normag") are
 makers of elevators, machinery for mines,
 sluice gates and weirs, and of Diesel-driven
 agricultural tractors. They employed some
 500 workers in 1939.

- 513 -

NORDHORN (Hanover)
52° 25' N. 7° 5' E:  315 miles:  (22,000)

 Nordhorn is close to the Dutch frontier on a branch railway
which leaves the main Berlin-Hanover-Ho Hand line at Bentheim
10 miles to the South and leads through Nordhorn to Coevorden
in Holland The Vechte-Ems branch canal connects Nordhorn with
the Dortmund-Ems canal 8 miles to the East The peacetime
industry is almost entirely textile and it is reported that Nordhorn
is now making a speciality of parachute manufacture. Much of
the labour now employed is drawn from the neighbouring districts
of Holland.

 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

 Niehus & Dotting Nordhorn (2)
This spinning and weaving mill, which is the
largest of its kind in Nordhorn, is now
specialising in parachute manufacture.
Some 6,000 workers are believed to be employed.

Povel 0. m.b. H. Nordhorn (3)

E: Rawe & Co. Nordhorn (3)
 
Bussmate Nordhorn (3)

Kistemaker & Schlieper Nordhorn (3)


The above are examples of a number of spinning
and weaving mills in Nordhorn, which are now
believed to be largely engaged on parachute-
making.

- 514 -

NURNBERG (Bavaria)
49° 30' N. 11° 5' E: 510 miles: (450,000)

 Nürnberg is the second largest city of Bavaria and claims to
exceed Munich in the extent of its industrial development' It is
s. railway centre of great importance as it lies at the intersection
of the North-South and the East-West traffic routes.

 Nürnberg was chosen as the centre of the annual Nazi .Party
rallies and an area of over 2500 acres to the South-east of the
walled city, on the South bank of the Lake known as the (Jr os er Dutzend
Teich, was set aside for this purpose The building schemes, which
were still in process of completion at the outbreak of war, included
numbers of vast public buildings, halls and offices, assembling
grounds and arenas, and a gigantic stadium dedicated to the supreme
manifestations of Nazi showmanship.

 The old town is to the North of the main railway on either side
of the small River Pegnitz, and is surrounded by the original city
wall It is a closely-built area, and its picturesque mediaeval
architecture is the chief attraction for Nürnberg's large tourist
traffic.

 The principal industrial area is to the South of the main railway
station and lies between the suburb of Schweinau and the Sudbahnhof
Among the industries are important makers of vehicle engines, tanks,
searchlights and electric motors There are other industries at
HermhStte, an outlying suburb to the North East of the walled city
pürth, a town of 81,000 inhabitants, which almost Joins Nürnberg to the
West, is dealt with separately (see page 255)'


 Transportation

 Railway Junction      Nürnberg (2)
   Two main railway lines coming from the North
   and from the West through Bamberg and Würzburg
   respectively Join at Purth before entering
   Nürnberg' To the East two lines, which run
   parallel for some 20 miles, lead into Czecho-
   slovakia via Eger and Pilsen, To the South-
   east is a direct route via Passau to Vienna;
   To the South the main North to South line
   continues via Ingolstadt to Munich; and a
   further line leads from Nürnberg Southwest-
   wards to Crailsheim and Stuttgart, All these
   are main railway arteries. The Junctions are
   to the East and to the West of the main railway
   station, approximately one mile apart.

 Marshalling Yards      Sudbahnhof (3)

   The principal marshalling yards of Nürnberg,
   which are of recent construction, are close
   to the Südbahnhof approximately one mile to
   the south of the main railway station. They
   are capable of handling 2,900 wagons per 24
   hours
   
- 515 -


NUREMBHRG (NÜRNBERG)- (oontck)

  Good' Yards        Nürnberg (3)
   The Nürnberg goods yards are to the West of
   the main railway station close to the
   junction of the main lines from F&rth
   and from the South-west and South.

 Railway Repair Shops      Nürnberg (2)
   These are large workshops which maintain
   and repair locomotives and all kinds of
   rolling stock Some 3500 workers are
   employed

 Railway Repair Works      Nürnberg (3)
   A second railway repair works has been
   built since 1942 to the West of the
   above and it is believed to be engaged
   on the repair of main-line locomotives


 Public Utility Services

 Power Station      Gebersdorf (2)
   The thermal powfer station is situated 3i
  miles South-west of the main railway station
   at Gebersdorf, and has an installed capacity
   of 100 MW It is owned by Grosskraftwerk
   Pranken A.G in which company the Nürnberg and
   Fttrth Corporations have the controlling interests
   The 100 kV switching and transformer station
   attached to the main Gebersdorf plant is owned
   by Bayernwerk AG| it is located in the Southern
   area of the plant and is important on account
   of its focal position in the electrical supply
   system of Southern Germany
    It is on the route that is being developed
   to carry the 220 kV line from the Central Austrian
   Alps to the Rhineland via Golpa and Dresdorf
   (Magdeburg)
    It is believed to be a connecting point for
   the line from the Bayernwerk to Central Germany
   Four long-distance 100 kV double-circuit trans-
   mission lines run to Bamberg, Kachlet, Würzburg,
   and Ms it ingen respectively A 50 kV line runs
   to Weissenberg.
    Local supplies are given at 20 kV and lower
   voltages to Iwrriberg and district

 Gasworks        Nürnberg (3)
   In 1936 the municipal gasworks made 1,600
   million cubic feet of gas A small quantity
   of sewage gas was also taken from the city
   sewage plant

- 516 -

 

Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

 Aluminiumwerke Nopitschstr. (3)
The Aluminiumwerke Nürnberg G.m.b.H. whose
works are in the suburb of Schweinau, are
makers of die-oast aluminium, alloys, aero-
engine pistons, cylinder heads, and of all
kinds of aluminium and Nural (Electron)
castings. Their annual capacity before the
war -was 2500 tons.

 Engineering and Armaments

M.A. N. Nürnberg (1)
The works of the Maschinenfabrik Augsburg-
Numberg A.G. occupy a large area in the
southern part of the town immediately to
the North of the Sjemens-Schuckert plant.
In peacetime the Nurnberg M.A. N. plant
specialised in engines, turbines, boilers
and accumulators. The iron and metal
foundry had 15 cupola and melting furnaces
with an estimated annual capacity of 10,000
tons. These works are second only in
importance to the Augsburg factory of the
M.A. N. concern and now have a similar range
of products. They are important builders
of Diesel engines and trucks and since 1936
or 1937 have devoted a large proportion of
their capacity to the construction of various
types of tanks. Approximately 6,000 workers
were employed at the outbreak of'war, but it
is believed that this number will have been
increased.

Siemens-Schuckert Katzwangenstr. (2)
Siemens-Schuckert Landgrabenstr. 2)

The Nürnberg works of the Sianens-Schuckert
A.G. are divided into two sections, one
(Katzwangenstr)
being immediately to the
South, and the other (Landgrabenstr)
approximately 500 yards to the Northwest of the
M.A. N. works. The Landgrabenstr. works
construct electric motors of all types,
including those for U-boats. They also
manufacture and assemble sound-locators
and searchlights. In 1942 they were
reported as completing one searchlight
per day. Other products of these works
include dynamos, generators and electrical
firing devices for sea-mines.

The Katzwangenstr. works are the principal
German manufacturers and constructors of
electrical transformers, including those of
the largest size. These works were heavily
damaged by bombing in 1943 and a considerable

- 517 -
 

   number of transformers, already filled with
   oil and ready for despatch, were destroyed
   Siemens-Schuckert Nurnberg factories r
   estimated to employ more than 10,000 wrkeiw

 G. Muller       Äussere Bayreutherstr. (1)   
 The works of the Kugellagerfabrik Georg Milller
   are in the Northeastern suburb of Herrnhütte.
   They are the leading German producers of
   special ball-bearings for magnetos, and in
   this particular high-quality type of bearing
   they had a larger output than Kugelfischer of
   Schweinfurt In November 1945 they were
   reported to be employing 1,000 workers.
   Their production will assume extra importance
   owing to the damage to the Schweinfurt plant,
   and it is possible that they are increasing
   their output of the heavier types of bearing'

 Faunwerke       Wachterstr. (1)
   The Faunwerke G'mb.H, whose works are to the
   North-east of the central city area, are makers
   of heavy motor vehicles and tractors. Their
   works have been greatly enlarged and the
   number of workers employed has been reported
   as high as 14,000' In 1943 they were special-
   ising in 8-oylinder Diesel traotors for use on
   road and rail, and adjustable to both the
   Russian and German gauges' The Diesel engines
   for these tractors were largely supplied by
   M.A.J4

 ZÜndepp        Dieselstr. (2)
   The main works of the ZÜndapp Werke G.m.b.H.
   are close to and South-west of the Schweinau
   railway station' Their products include
   motor-cycles and sidecars, electrical ooironents
   for searchlights, small explosive-carrying
   "tanks' directed by remote control There
   is also a small 50'h.p Zundapp aero-engine.
   4$ 000 workers are said to be employed by this
   firm, which has two other plants in Nürnberg
   At one of their subsidiary factories munitions
   and hand grenades are reported to be produced.

 Triumph Werke       Furtherstr. (2)
   The Triumph Werke Nürnberg A. G', whose works
   are to the West of the city on the road
   leading to Filrth, are makers of motor cycles,
   bicycles, typewriters, and calculating
   machines. They employed some 2,000 workers
   before the war, having greatly increased
   their activity during the years 1934 to 1939.
   They are now believed to be making chiefly
   motorcycles.

- 518 -



Noris ZÜndlicht      Maiachstr. (-)

 The Noris Zundlicht A.G' belong to the
 Elektrizität A.G. vorm. Sohuckert & Co,
 one of the principal holding companies of
 the Siemens concern' The Noris works are
 in the Southwestern suburb of Schweinau'
 They are makers of sparking plugs and ignition
 systems for internal combustion engines.
 Before the war they employed some 30O workers'

Chillingworth A.G.     Walzwerks tr. (3)

 The Press-, Stanz-, & Ziewerk Rud. Chillingworth
  A'G are makers of steel constructional parts
  for ships, railways, motor vehicles, and air-
  craft. Their works, which are to the North-
  east of the city near the Ostbahnhof railway
  station, include a well-equipped plant with
  16 large hydraulic presses, stamping machines,
  drop hammers, and electrical welding installations.
  They are believed to be producing bomb- and shell-
  oases. This firm doubled the number of its
  workers during the three years before the war,
  and were employing some 30O people in 1939

Süddeutsche Apparatefabrik     Platenstr, (3)


 The süddeutsche Apparatefabrik G.nub'H belongs
 to the Standard Elektrizitäts Ges' A.G. which
 in its turn was mainly owned by the inter-
 national Telephone & Telegraph Co. of N.w York.
 This Nürnberg factory is to the South of the
 city near to the M.A. N. works. It special-
 ised before the war in the manufacture of
 selenium discs for wireless rectifiers. The
 output was k million discs per month. In
 March 1943, the factory was damaged by bombing,
 but is reported to be still partly operating
 in the old premises and also in other buildings
 in the town.


Nürnberger Schraubenfabrik Paumgartnerstr, (2)
Nürnberger Schraubenfabrik Obere Kanal Str 2)


 The Nürnberger Schraubenfabrik & Facondreherei
 are important makers of precision screws and
 nuts for tanks and aircraft, and are believed in
 1942 to have been producing 20 per cent, of the
 German requirements. They are also reported to
 be making shells and small arms ammunition parts.
 The Baumgartnerstr. factory, which is in the
 East of the city and near the road to Fürth,
 employed some 1,300 workers before the war.
 The Obere Kanal Str. works, which are a short
 distance nearer to the city, are important
 makers of radio parts, and employed some 800
 workers.

- 519 -

 

  Ardie Werk Preisslerstr. (3)

   . The Ardie Werk A.G. are makers of motorcycles
   and components. They employed some 800
   workers before the -war.

  Neumeyer A. G. Klingenhofstr. (2)

   The Kabel and Metallwerke Neumeyer A. G. are a
   subsidiary company of the Hackethal Draht &
   Kabelwerke A.G. of Hannover. Their works
   are in the outlying North-eastern suburb of
   Hermhütte. Some 3,000 workers were employed
   in 1939. They manufacture electric wires and
   cables, and in addition have a large press
   works and foundry which produce wires, rods,
   tubes and frames. Reports suggest that a
   major war-time product is cartridge cases.

  Suddeutsche Telefon Nonnenstr. (3)

   The Suddeutsche Telefon Apparate. Kabel &
   Drahtwerke A.G. are a subsidiary of Felton
   & Guilleaume of Koln. They employed approx-
   imately 1,000 workers before the war and manu-
   facture radio receivers, telephone-exchange
   installations, and electrical signalling
   apparatus.

  Armaturen & Maschinenfabrik A. G. Glockenhofstr (3)
  Armaturen & Maschinenfabrik A.G. Pegnitz 3)

   The Armaturen & Maschinenfabrik A. G. vorn.
   J. A. Hilpert (Amag-Hilpert-Pegnitzh&tte) are
   makers of centrifugal and piston pumps and
   high-pressure steam fittings. They special-
   ise in pumps for deep wells and for use in
   the heavy chemical industry. The Glocken-
   hofstr. works are near the main railway
   station and produce mainly the pumping
   installations. The Pegnitz works, which
   include a foundry and three cupola furnaces,
   specialise in steam pressure valves and
   fittings. Sane 1500 workers were employed
   before the war.


Eisenwerk Nürnberg Aüssere Sulzbacherstr. (3)


The Eisenwerk Nürnberg A. G. vom J. Tafel & Co.
are makers of iron frames and structures, bars,
fish plates, nuts, bolts and screws. Their
works are to the North-east of the city in the
suburb of St. Jobst. They employed approx-
imately 1,000 workers before the war.

- 520 -

 

Sprengstoff A.G. Kirchenweg (3)
The Rheinisch-Westfälische Sprengstoff A. G.,
a firm belonging to the Dynamit A.G., manu-
facture S.A.A., percussion caps, and prop-
ellants. They are reported to have greatly
expanded their works. Several thousand
workers are now said to be employed.

- 521 -

OBERHAUSEN (Rhineland)
51° 30' N. 6° 50' E:  300 miles: (194,000)

  The area covered here lies in the Western section of the
Rphr industrial area and adjoins the areas of Duisburg in the West,
Mulheimin the South, and Bottrop in the East, It includes
Oberhausen in the South, Holten in the North west, and is bounded
by the Rhineland-Westphalian provincial boundary in the North-east.
More than half of the industries in the Oberhausen district are
concerned with coal, coke, and iron and steel: these include the
famous iron and steelworks of Gutehoffnungshutte Oberhausen A.G. The
town is served by the River Ruhr in the South and by the Rhein-Herne
Canal in the North.

  At Sterkrade-Holten there is an important power station, a
tar-distillation plant, a Fisoher-Tropsch synthetic oil and a synthetic
ammonia plant, and part of the engineering section of Gutehoffnungshutte
Oberhausen A. G.

  At Osterfeld there are important marshalling yards and the
Vondern colliery.

 Transportation

  Marshalling Yard      Oberhausen-West (3)
  The yard and Junction are situated immediately North of
  the main station and have a capacity of 3,100 wagons per
  24 hours. This was assessed by the German railway
  authorities as the most efficient yard in the country
  before the war.

  Marshalling Yard      Oberhausen-West (3)
  The goods station is situated 1 mile West of
  Oberhausen main station and extends about 1 mile
  East North East. The capacity of the yard is not
  known.

  Marshalling Yard      Osterfeld-Sud (2)
  The western end of the yard lies miles North-east
  of Oberhausen main station, thence it extends about
  1J miles to the East. The capacity is 6,800 wagons
  per 24 hours.

  Twin locks, 2nd set     N. W. of Oberhausen (3)
  The second set of twin locks on the Rhine-Herne
  canal is situated 1£ miles West North West of
  Oberhausen main station.

  Twin locks, 3rd set     N. E. of Oberhausen (3)
  The 3rd set of twiy locks is situated Just South
  of the Osterfeld-Sud marshalling yard, 3j mi les
  North-East of Oberhausen main station.

 

- 522 -

 Public Utility Services

  Ruhrchemie power station Sterkrade-Holten (2)
  The power station was original ly built to supply
  the steam and electrical requirements of the nitrate
  and chemical works of Ruhrchemie A.G. to whomit
  belongs. It is situated near the village of Holten,
  5 miles North-west of Oberhausen. It is sometimes
  known as the Oberhausen-Hol ten” power station. When
  the Ruhrbenzin A.G. Fischer-Tropsch synthetic oil plant
  was built adjoining it the power station was extended
  to meet the requirements of the plant and the original
  capacity of 10 MW. ms increased to 80 W. There is
  a substation in the North-west corner of the site.
  Supplies are given to the adjoining works probably by
  mediun/and low-voltage underground cables. A 110-kV
  overhead transmission line connects to the 110/220 kV
  line to the Hamborn (Duisburg) substation.
  
 Municipal Power Station    Oberhausen  (-)

  It is situated J mile South-west of the main station,
  and is believed to have a capacity of 7 W.

 Municipal Gasworks    Ob er Musen  (3)
  The gasworks, situated J mile North-west of the
  station, is supplied by the Ruhr gas and Thyssen
  grids, 428 million cubic feet of gas were bought
  and sold in 1936.


 Solid Fuels 

Concordia coking plant Oberhausen (3)
  Situated J mile North-west of Oberhausen main
  station, the plant is owned by the Concordia
  Bergbau A.G. and is adjacent to Pits 1/3. There
  are 155 ovens having an estimated annual dry coal
  capacity of 561,000 tons.

 Osterfeld coking plant    N. Oberhausen (3)
  Owned by the Gutehoffnungshutte Oberhausen
  A.G., the plant is situated 2 miles North-
  North-East of Oberhausen station. There are
  160 ovens having an estimated annual dry coal
  capacity of 1500,000 tons. Gas is supplied
  to the Ruhr gas grid.

 Jacobi coking plant    N. N. E. Oberhausen (3)
  Owned by Gutehoffnungshutte Oberhausen A. G., the
  plant is situated 3^ miles North-North-East of
  Oberhausen main station. There are 160 ovens
  with an estimated annual dry coal capacity of
  860,000 tons.


 

- 523 -

 

 Concordia colliery     N. W. of Oberhausen (3)
   Situated North-west of Oberhausen the output
   of the colliery in 1937 amounted to 1,570,000
   tons of hard coal. Some 2,860 workers were
   employed in the coking plant and colliery before
   the war.

  Osterfeld 1/4 Colliery      N. Oberhausen (3)

   This colliery also includes Sterkrade 1/2 and
   is pwned by G-utehofftiungshutte A.G-. It is
   situated North-east of Oberhausen station. In
   1937 the output of these pits was 2,320,000
   tons of hard coal.

  Vondern 1/2 Colliery      Oberhausen (3)
   The colliery (including Jakobi Pit 1/2) is owned
   by Gutehoffnungshutte Oberhausen A.G-. and is
   situated North-east of Oberhausen. The output in
   1937 was 1,723,000 tons of hard coal.

 Liquid Fuels and Substitutes

 Sterkrade distillation plant    Sterkrade (3)
   Situated at Sterkrade Pits 1/2, 3j m. N. N. W. of
   Oberhausen main station. This tar distillation,
   plant is owned by G-utehofftiungshutte Oberhausen
   A.G-. The factory has a purifying plant and
   takes the raw material from many of the coking
   plants in the surrounding area. The tar dis-
   tillery consists of 4-5 Otto ovens. 50,000 tons
   of tar were processed in 1929.

 Rurchemie A.C.     Sterkrade-Holten (2)
   This Fischer-Tropsch synthetic-oil plant is owned
   by Ruhrbenzin A.G-. and is situated 4 miles North-
   west of Oberhausen main station and 1 mile East
   of Holten: the works covers 27 acres. It has an
   estimated capacity of 125,000 tons per annum and
   storage capacity of 27,000 tons. The works has
   its own power station (see under' P.
   U. S. ”) but also takes power from the grid.
   The chief products are petrol, gas-oil and
   lubricants. See under'Chemicals” for details
   of the adjoining synthetic-ammonia plant.

 Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys

 Gutehoffnungshhtte Oberhausen A.G.   Oberhausen (1)
   The iron and steelworks are situated 1 mile
   North-east of Oberhausen main station.
   There are 8 blast furnaces with an estimated
   annual capacity of 900,000 tons of pig iron;
   6 basic Bessemer converters and 12 open-hearth
   furnaces with a capacity of approximately
   1,200,000 tons of crude steel per annumThe
   plant has rolling mills capable of absorbing
   

- 524 -
 

 Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys

   the whole of its steel output and the finished
   products cover the usual full range. See also
   under " E. and A. ". The company
   has its own power station having an estimated
   capacity of 27 MW.

 Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

 A.G. des Altenbergs fur Bergbau  und Zinkhüttenbetrieb   Oberhausen (3)
  

   Situated i m. South-east of Oberhausen main
   station, the firm has an estimated capacity
   of 24,000 tons of zinc sheets annually, and
   employs over 200 workers.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Outehoffnungshütte Oberhausen A.G.    Sterkrade (2)
   The firm's engineering sections lie 2^ miles
   North of Oberhausen main station at Sterkrade.
   They are one of the principal manufacturers of
   heavy equipment for steelworks etc., and are
   also important producers of steam turbines,
   compressors, and pumps. Other products in-
   clude lifts and hoists, cable ways, coal-
   oleaning and ore-dressing plant, and trams
   for mines. See also under'Iron & Steel".

 Babcock & Wilcox     W. Oberhausen (2)
   Deutsche Babcock & Wilcox Danpfkesselwerke A.G.
   are situated 1 mile West of Oberhausen main
   station. They are one of the four principal
   German makers of land boilers. Other products
   are ventilators (for mines) and travelling
   grates.

 Chemicals and Explosives

 Ruhrchemie A.G.      Sterkrade-Holten (3)

   The Casale-process synthetic-ammonia plant
   lies adjoining the synthetic-oil plant, 4 miles
   North-west of Oberhausen main station. The
   ammonia-oxidation plant has 272 small Ostwald
   convertors. The capacity is estimated at
   54,000 metric tons of nitrogen per annum. In
   addition, there is a nitric-acid plant; other
   products are ammonium sulphate, ammonium
   nitrate, and sodium nitrate.
   For the synthetic-oil plant see under " Liquid
   Fuels and Substitutes ".

 Kali Chemie A.G.      Oberhausen (3)
   The works which make sulphuric acid are situated
   immediately adjoining, and West of, Oberhausen
   main station. They are inportant consumers of
   
- 525 -

 

 Chemicals and Explosives


   pyrites, and it is probable that the pyrites
    deliveries on the Rhine-Herne canal are mainly
    for this company. The lead-chmber process is
    used and the estimated annual capacity of 100^c
    sulphuric acid exceeds 20,000 tons.

- 526 -

OBERNBURG-MAIN (Bavaria)
49° 50' N. 9° 09' E: 425 miles: (2,600)

  Oberriburg is situated, on the river Main, 14 miles
  south of Aschaffenburg. It is a small town with
  only one large works.


 Public Utility Services

Power station Oberriburg (-)


   The thermal power station is owned by the Vereinigte
   Glanzstoff-Fabriken A.G. Wuppertal, and is believed
   to have an installed capacity of 18MW.


 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

Glanz stoff A.G, Oberriburg (-)


   The Vereinigte Glanzs toff-Fabriken A.G. are manu-
   facturers of artificial silk. The main factory
   is in Wuppertal.



OBERNDORF (Württemberg)
48° 15' N. 8° 35' E:  445 miles: (10,000)



   Oberndorf is in the South-western area of Württemberg on the
 upper reaches of the River Neckar, and on the eastern side of
 the Black Forest. The main line from Stuttgart to Schaff-
 hausen and Zurich passes through Oberndorf. The parent works
 of the Mauser weapon concern are the industry of what would
 otherwise be a remote market town. The population, which was
 only 6,000 in 1937, will now have been greatly increased
 through the wartime expansion of these works.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Mauserwerke        Oberndorf (1)

   The Mauserwerke A.G. are an old-established weapon
   factory which specialises in automatic pistols and
   rifles. Ikiring the interval period their plant
   continued to be highly active and was partly
   occupied by producing precision tools, textile
   machinery, and adding machines. They were a valuable
   potential supplier of armaments, and in 1938 were
   already employing some 12,000 workers, having trebled
   the number during the previous two years. A new
   factory which went into production in 1940 has been
   erected in the woods to the South of the Oberndorf,
   and the old works are now said to be engaged largely
   on repairs. The large numbers of imported labourers
   are housed in newly-erected workers' colonies.


 

- 527 -

 

Engineering and Armaments

   The range of production includes 15 Ma. and
   20 mm. cannon, machine, guns, automatic pistols,
   rifles, and carbines. This firmis among the
   leading specialists in the small-arms field,
   and is of great importance to the German war
   machine.


OBERNKIRCHEN (Hanover)
52° 15' N. 9° 5' E: 400 miles: (4,000)

 Obernkirchen is on a branch railway, 10 miles East of
  Minden. It is the centre of a small coalfield, which pro-
  vides the chief industrial activity of the town. The
  other industries, which include small glass factories and
  brickworks, are of no importance.

 Solid Fuels

 Gesamtbergamt      Oberkirchen (3)
   The Gesamtbergamt Obernkirchen G.m.b.H, owns
   four pits in the vicinity of Obernkirchen, which
   before the war had a total annual output of about
   400,000 tons of coal. There is a coking and by-
   products plant, and a briquetting plant which pro-
   duced 64,000 tons of briquettes in 1937 Some
   2,400 workers are believed to be employed.


OBERSCHELD (Hessen—Nassau)
50° 45' N. 8° 10' E:  370 miles:  (1,800)


  Oberscheld is a small town three miles East of Dillenburg
 on the Siegen-Wetzlar railway line. Its importance arises
 from the working of the Siegenland iron-ore deposits in the
 vicinity.


 Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys

 August Stollon Mine near Oberscheld (3)
   This iron-ore mine is situated in the Lahn-Dill
   district and is one of six owned by the
   Buderus'sehe Eisenwerke A.G. In 1937 the output
   of this mine amounted to 306,000 tons of iron-ore
   and workers numbered 1,400.

 

- 528 -

 

 Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys



 Hochofenwerk Oberscheld Oberscheld (3)
   This works is owned by the Buderus'sehe Eisen-
   werke A.G-. Wetzlar. The plant has 2 blast
   furnaces and its own power station of a capacity
   under 10 MW. About 60,000 tons of pig-iron
   are belleeved to be produced annually.


OBERURSEL (Hessen-Nassau)
50° 10 ' N. 8° 35' E: 390 miles: (12,000)

  Oberursel is 6 miles North-west of Frankfurt a. Main
  and near to Bad Hamburg in the Taunus district. Apart
  from the motor works the industries, which include
  leather and hosiery, are on a small scale.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Klöckner-Humboldt-Deutz     Oberursel (3)
  The former Motorenfabrik Oberursel A.G. were
   amalgamated with the Humboldt Deutz concern in
   1930, and the works were closed down for some
   years. They were reopened in 1935 and are now
   believed to be employing some 1500 workers and
   manufacturing small Diesel engines and fuel-
   infection pumps, as well as small troop-carrying
   trucks.



OELS (Silesia)
51° 15' N. 17° 10' E: 775 miles: (16,000)

   Oels is 18 miles North-east of Breslau and 20 miles from
 the Polish border. It is a garrison town and is the centre
 of an agricultural district. The industries, which include
 furniture manufacture, flour milling, and leather, are on
 a minor scale, but include a large railway workshops.

 Transportation

 Railway Repair Shops       Oels (3)
  These repair shops, which are adjacent to the main
   railway station, employ some 3,000 workers, and under-
   take the repair and maintenance of locomotives and
   rolling stock of all kinds.

 

- 529 -

OELSNITZ (Vogtland)
50° 25' N. 12° 10' E:  540 miles: (l6,000)

   Oelsnitz (Vogtland) is in the Southern, area of
  Saxony 10 miles South of Plauen. Textiles are the chief
  industry, in particular the making of curtains, carpets,
  shirts, and knitted goods. None of the factories are
  indi vidually of importance. This town must not be con-
  fused with Oelsnitz (Erzgebirge), a coal-mining town 30
  miles to the North East which is described above.
 

OESTRICH (Hessen-Nassau)
50° 5' N. 8° 5' E: 375 miles: (3,200)

   Oestrich in the Rheingau is on the right bank of
  the Rhine, 4 miles upstream from Rüdesheim and 10 miles
  West of Wiesbaden. It is mainly concerned with agricul-
  ture and wine growing, and the only plant of importance
  is the Chemical works.

 Chemicals and Explosives

 Koepp & Co.        Oestrich (3)
   Rudolf Koepp & Co., A.G. are manufacturers of heavy
   chemicals, including oxalic, formic, and prussic
   acid and caustic soda. They employed some 300 workers
   before the war.


OFFENBACH-ON-MAIN (Hesse)
50° 5' N. 8° 45' E: 400 miles: (86,000)

   Offenbach is best known as the leading German leather-
  goods manufacturing centre. It also has a reputation for
  the manufacture of leather and boots and shoes, and during
  the past 10 years has developed a modest engineering
  industry, which is, however, still mainly confined to a
  number of medium sized and smaller firms. The five en-
  gineering works listed below under “ Engineering and
  Armaments ” have all been extended in the course of the
  war, but none is individually of outstanding importance.
  In addition to the engineering works and the tanneries
  and leather goods factories, there is one large chemical
  plant, of the I.G. Farbenindustrie A.G., which is mainly
  engaged on the manufacture of dyes and colours.

   Offenbach is a very closely built-up town of only
  little ackninistrative importance. From a general adminis-'
  trative point of view, it is largely dependent on Darmstadt,
  the centre' of the State of Hesse.

   As a railway centre Offenbach is of little importance.
  It is situated on main lines but these are secondary to the
 

- 530 -

 

lines between Frankfort and Hanau, on the opposite bank of the river.

 Public Utility Services

 Stadt' Gas' Wasser und Elektrizitätswerke Offenbach (3)
   The municipal gas, water and electricity works
   are situated on a corner site in the North-
   western area of the town. The gasworks
   purchased 380 million cubic feet of gas in
   1936 from the Main-Gaswerke at Frankfort'
   The power station is reported to have an
   installed capacity of 24 W'

 Engineering and Armaments

 Mayer A Schmidt      Offenbach (2)
   This firmis now believed to employ in the
   neighbourhood of 800 workers on the manu-
   facture of grinding wheels and grinding
   machinery. It is one of the largest German
   grinding-wheel makers, and has a subsidiary
   factory at Rheinfelden in Baden where crude
   aluminium-oxide is produced'

 Friedrich Schmalz     Offenbach (3)
   Prior to the war this firm employed sane 300
   workers on the manufacture of grinding wheels,
   tools, and machinery. It is believed to have
   been extended in the course of the war, and
   to be now employing roughly 500 workers. The
   factory is situated close to the works of
   Mayer & Schmidt mentioned above.

 Wilhelm St3hr       Offenbach (3)
   The StShr factory is mainly engaged on the
   manufacture of conveyors and similar trans-
   port installations. Prior to the war some
   400 workers were employed by this firm'

 Masohinenfabrik Hartmann A. G.    Offenbach (3)
   Hartmann specialises in the manufacture of
   silo and storage-house equipment, vacuum
   pumps and air purifying installations, and
   similar equipment' It is believed that
   some 500 workers are employed by this company.

 

- 531 -

 

  Collet und Engelhardt A.G'    Offenbach (2)
   Thia is the largest of the engineering works
   in the district of Offenbach, and specialises
   in the manufacture of machine tools and
   special machinery for munition factories'
   Prior to the war at least one department of
   thia undertaking was engaged on the manufacture
   of plant for aircraft works, and it has been
   reported that certain minor components for
   aircraft were at one time made here on a
   small scale' The present full range of
   products of this company is not known, but it
   is believed that the factory is fully active
   and reports suggest that in the neighbourhood
   of 1,200 workers are employed'

   Note: There are in addition in the Offenbach
    area a number of small engineering works
    employing between 100 and 30O workers
    each. The larger of these are:

   Weintraud & Co. Making canning machines, bottle
      washing, labelling and corking
      machines'

   Jahn G'm.b.H' Making rotating pumps, engine
      regulators, etc.

   Philipp Loos Making boilers, metal containers
      (drums), machine benches, etc.

   Wilhelm Fredenhafen Making special machinery for
      the tobacco, soap and chemical
      industries, etc.

 Chemicals and Explosives

  I. G.Farbenindustrie A.G.     Offenbach (3)

   This is one of the analler works of the
   I.G.Farbenindustrie concern, and it is
   believed to be engaged mainly on the
   manufacture of dyes and colours. It
   operates in conjunction with the I, G. works
   at Mainkur, on the opposite side of the
   river.

  Leather

  J. Mayer & Sohn      Offenbach (3)

   This is one of the largest German tanneries,
   which prior to the war employed approximately
   1500 workers, mainly on the production of
   upper and lining leathers.


         

- 532 -

 

  August Hoffmann      Offenbach (-)

   This medium-sized tannery specialises in
   the production of upper and fancy leathers'

  Lederfabrik Becker and Co.    Offenbach (-)

   In 1939 this tannery employed some 750,
   workers on the manufacture of box calf
   and side leathers, as well as fancy kid
   for leather goods.

  O.Rugner       Offenbach (-)

   Some 200 workers were previously employed
   by this firm on the production of book-
   binding and fancy leather for leather goods,
   as well as the tanning of reptile skins.

  A. N. Schmidt & Co.      Offenbach (-)

   Prior to the war, this was the second-largest
   German leather-goods factory, employing
   approximately 1,000 workers on the manufacture
   of practically the whole range of leather
   goods, including belting and saddlery ware,
   suitcases, trunks, etc

  Ludwig Krunm A.G.     Offenbach (-)

   In 1939 this factory employed about 1,200
   workers, and was considered to be the largest
   German leather-goods plant, specialising in
   the manufacture of fancy and light leather
   goods.

  SW. Brody      Offenbach (-)

   This firm used to employ several hundred
   workers on the manufacture of fancy leather
   goods.

  Schuhfabrik Hers     Offenbach (-)

   Before the war this firm employed nearly
   1,000 workers on the manufacture of boots
   and shoes' Ground reports suggest that the
   factory was fully active during the early
   part of 1943, end was mainly engaged on the
   manufacture of leather equipment for the
   German army.


   Note: There are, in addition, some 300
   tanneries and leather goods factories in
   the Offenbach area, together employing
   directly or indirectly as many as 30,000
   workers. Those indirectly enployed consist
   mainly of home workers making up the out
   materials supplied to them by the factories.
        

- 533 -

 

      Centre' of home worker', which are generally
      included in the Offenbach leather and leather
      good' industry, are the nearby localities of
      Bieber, Bürgel, Heusenstamm, etc.

- 534 -

OFFENBURG (Baden)
48° 30' N. 7° 55' E: 415 miles: (20,000)


   Offenburg is on the main railway line which follows the course
of the Rhine to Basle, It is 6 miles from the right bank of the river
and 15 miles South-east of Strassburg. An important branch line
diverges at Offenburg and leads through the Black Forest to Donaueschingen
and Southern Württemberg, There is a large railway workshop, Offenburg
is mainly a market town for the surrounding agricultural and wine-growing
district, but has a number of textile and specialist industriesₜ
including hosiery and knitted goods, cigars, leather goods, and enamelled
metal plates for signs and advertisements.


 Transportation 
 
 Marshalling Yards Offenburg (3)
   The Offenburg marshalling yards are capable of
   handling up to 3,200 wagons per 24 hours.

 Railway Repair Shops     Offenburg  (3)

   These repair shops employ some 2,000 workers and
   undertake the repair of main-line locomotives and
   all kinds of rolling stock.

 
OLDENBURG (Oldenburg)
53° 10' N. 8° 10' E:   370 miles: (78,000)

  Oldenburg is 25 miles West of Bremen and is an important railway
junction on the routes to Emden and Wilhelmshaven, It is primarily
an agricultural centre and has a large cattle market. There are
several small-scale industries including a spinning mill and a number
of furniture manufacturers, but none is of outstanding importance.

Transportation

Inland Harbour      Oldenburg  (3)
   Oldenburg is on the Hunte-Ems Canal, which
   connects the Weser with the Ems. From Oldenburg
   Eastwards this canal follows the valley of the
   small tributary, the Hunte, to its influx into
   the Weser. The Hunte is navigable for small
   craft.

 Railway Junction      Oldenburg  (3)
   Oldenburg is on the main line from Bremen to
   Emden,, Inside the town area and immediately
   to the West of the marshalling yards a line
   diverges to the North and leads to Wilhelmshaven.
   This forms the only trunk railway connection
   with Wilhelmshaven. Two other branch lines lead
   North and South to Brake and Osnabrück respectively.

 

- 535 -
 


Marshalling Yards.     Oldenburg   (3)
  The marshalling yards to the West of the main
  railway station are capable of handling 2,000
  wagons per 24 hours. Most of the goods traffic
  to and from Wilhelmshaven must pass through these
  yards.

 Railway Repair Shops.    Oldenburg  (3)
  These repair shops, which adjoin the main railway
  station, undertake mainly the repair of goods
  wagons.
 

OPLADEN (Rhineland)
51° 5' N. 7° E:   310 miles: (20,000)

  Opladen is 12 miles North of Koln on the River Wupper 6 miles
fromits influx into the Rhine. The town is on the railways connecting
Koln with Dusseldorf and with Wuppertal, and there are important railway-
repair shops. There are two engineering works, but apart from these
the railway Opladen has no industriesoof note.

 Transportation

 Railway Repair Shops.    Opladen   (2)
  These are large repair shops which are believed
  to employ some 4,000 workers, and repair passenger
  coaches and all kinds of rolling stock.

 Engineering and Armaments

 J.& W, Muller      Opladen   (3)
  The J. & W. Muller Metallwarenfabrik are makers
  of electric welding apparatus and electrodes.
  They specialised before the war also in sprays
  and atomizers for clinical use.

 Mersch & Neuss    .    Opladen   (-)

  This firm manufactures bicycles and bicycle
  components.
  

OPPAU (Baden)

    See under Mannheim'
  

- 536 -

OPPELN (Silesia)
50° 40' N. 7° 55' E: 785 miles:   (51,000)

 Oppeln is the chief administrative town of Upper Silesia and is
40 miles North-west of Gleiwitz on the main railway line from Breslau
It is a traffic centre of importance to the mining and industrial district
of Upper Silesia and is on the right bank of the river Oder, which forms
the chief inland-waterway connection for this part of Germany. Apart
from the large railway workshops, Oppein's chief activities are connected
with a number of large cement factories, the town being the administrative
centre for the important Silesian cement industry. There are no cement
works in Oppeln itself, but at least six large works with a total capacity
of about 1.5 million tons, are located in the surrounding countryside.
The town is also an important market centre for the surrounding agricultural
district.

 Transportation

 Railway Junction     Oppeln    (2)
  To the South-east of Oppeln the main line from
   Breslau divides into two branches, of which one
   leads to Gleiwitz and the Upper Silesian and Polish
   coal mines, and the other through Kosel and Ratibor
   to MÄhrisch-Ostrau in Czechoslovakia. Three
   branch lines lead Northwards from Oppeln and serve
   the agricultural region of Northern Upper Silesia;
   and a fourth branch connects the town with Neisse
   to the South-west.

 Railway Repair Shops     Oppeln    (3)

  These are large repair shops which employ some
   2500 workers and undertake the repair of passenger
   coaches and all kinds of rolling stock.

 Marshalling Yards    Oppeln    (3)

  These marshalling yards have a capacity for 2500
   wagons per 24 hours.

Miscellaneous Industries.

 Cement Werke     Oppeln    (-)

  The Portland Cement 4 Kalkwerke “Stadt Oppeln“ A.G.
   are one of several large cement works in Oppeln.
 

ORANIENBURG (Brandenburg)

See under Berlin


      

- 537 -

ORTELSBURG (East Prussia)
53° 35' N. 21° E: 900 miles:  (15,000)

 Ortelsburg, which is in the Southern area of the Province of
East Prussia, and in the region of the Masurian Lakes, is mainly
concerned with agriculture and apart from flour-milling has no other
industries.
 

OSCHERSLEBEN (Province Saxony)
 
 Oschersleben is 20 miles West-south-west of Magdeburg and 10
 miles North-east of Halberstadt, The only industry of note is the
important aircraft assembly works.

 Aircraft and Aero-Engines

AGO Oschersleben (2)
   The AGO Flugzeugwerke G'm.b.H, which belonged
   to the Gesellschaft für Elektrische Unternehmungen
   A.G. now in turn taken over by A.E. G. have a
   fighter aircraft works in Oschersleben, of the
   first importance. Several thousand workers are
   reported to be employed. Early in the war it built
   Me 1003 under license, but was turned over in 1%2
   to F.W. 190s, for which it is now one of the
   smaller assembly units. The factory is largely
   self-contained as regards the manufacture, finishing
   and assembly of the major airframe components.

- 538 -

OSNABRÜCK (Hannover)
52° 15' N. 8° 5' E:  350 miles:   (100,000)

 Osnabrück is a vital railway Jguiction. It is on the main rail-
way line from Berlin through Hannover to Holland, which is here
crossed by a second main line leading North-eastwards from the Ruhr
to Bremen and Hamburg. The iron and steel rolling mills and the
non-ferrous metal plant are both of major importance, as are also
the blast furnaces and coking plant of the Klocknerwerke in the ind-
ustrial settlement of Georg Marienhutte, which lies 5 miles to the
South of Osnabrück. The town has several engineering works of lesser
importance, and also large cotton-spinning and weaving mills, and a
paper factory. There is an inland harbour which connects with the
Mittellandkanal.



 Transportation


 Inland Harbour      Osnabrück (3)

   The Mittellandkanal passes from West to East
   approximately 9 miles to the North of Osnabrück.
   A branch leads from the inland harbour and Joins
   the main canal to the Northwest of the town.
   The inland harbour is in the North-eastern
   quarter of Osnabrück immediately North of the
   main railway line to Holland. The annual
   turnover before the war amounted to 500,000 tons.

 Railway Junction     Osnabrück (2)
   The main railway station is in the centre of the
   town and is on two levels, the line from the
   Rhineland to Bremen passing over the Berlin-Holland
   line by means of a broad viaduct. Both of these
   railways are highly important trunk routes, the
   first being the most direct route from Northern
   Germany to the Dutch seaboard, and the second
   being the main connection of the Ruhr, the
   Rhineland and Western Germany with Bremen, Hamburg
   and the German North Sea and Baltic ports. The
   two main tracks are also directly connected by
   several subsidiary lines.

 Marshalling Yards     Osnabrück (2)

  The chief marshalling yards, which have a
   capacity for 5,000 wagons per 24 hours, are
   situated to the East of the town centre along-
   side the main East to West track, and within half
   a mile of the railway crossing. A goods station
   with extensive loading facilities is adjacent to
   the marshalling yards.

 Railway Repair Shops      Osnabrück (3)

  These repair shops, which enploy some 1,400
   workers and undertake mainly the repair of
   goods wagons, are alongside the railway line
   to Bremen to the North of and within half a
   mile of the main railway station.
 
- 539 -

 

 Public Utility Services

 Electric Substations     Osnabrück (2)
   Osnabrück is served by three substations.
   One is situated within the oity area, one to
   the North-east known as Sohinkel, and one to
   the East of the city known as Lastringen.

Transmission from each c f these substations
is as followsj-
Osnabrüok - 100-150'kV  line to Schinkel
Schinkel - 30-80 kV line to Ibbenbüren
   - 30-80 kV line to Schwege
   - 30-80 kV line to Lustringen
  - 100-150'kV line to Osnabrück
Lustringen - 100-150'kV line to Ibbenbüren
  - 100-150'kV line to Paderborn
   - 30-80 kv line to Schinkel
   - 30-80 kv line to Ibbenbüren via
       Lengerich

   The important R.W.E. power station of Ibbenbüren
   lies only 15 miles to the West of Osnabrück and
   supplies the latter oity with its power through
   the three substations mentioned above'

 Power Station       Geors-Marien Hutte (3)
   Situated within the site of the Klookner-
   Werke A. Q, iron and steel works at Georgs-
   Marien Hutte, this thermal power station
   is believed to have an installed capacity
   of 30 W and to serve the steelworks and
   the domestic needs of the village of Georgs-
   Marien Hutte only.

 Gasworks       Osnabrück (3)

   Osnabrück municipal gasworks made 410 million
   cubic feet of gas in 1936

 Solid Fuels

 Coke-oven plant      South of Osnabrück (3)

   This coke-oven plant, which is situated 5
  miles South of Osnabrück, and is part of the
   Georgs-Marien Hutte iron and steel plant, is
   owned by Klockner-Werke A G. It has 100
   coke ovens and a dry coal capacity of
   346,000 tons per annum.

 

- 540 -

 

Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys

Klöckner Georgs- Marien Hütte (1)

   The Klöckner Werke A.G' have l^rge iron and
   steel works at Georgs-Marien Hütte, 5 miles to
   South of Osnabrück. These include four blast
   furnaces with adjacent Siemens-Martin steel plant.
   The capacity is estimated to be 500,000 tons of
   pig-iron and 850,000 tons of steel per annum'
   The works include a large coking plant (see under
   S. F. ) and a 30 MW power station (see under
   P. U. S.). The rolling mills and
   hammer works of the Klöckner concern, which are
   situated in Osnabrück itself, are mentioned below
   under E. and A.



 Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

Kupfer & Drahtwerk Osnabrück (2)
   The works of the Osnabrücker Kupfer- £ Drahtwerk
   A. G. occupy an area of more than one square kilo-
   metre in the Northern quarter of the town°
   They are now reported to belong to the Klöckner
   Werke A.G. This plant is one of the leading
   German producers of electric cables of all kinds,
   from telephone and telegraph to high-tension
   overhead cables. The copper refinery has an
   estimated annual capacity of 25,000 tons and the
   plant is now also equipped for aluminium fabrication.
   The works include rolling mills and wire-drawing
   plant, both for copper and aluminium, and a rubber
   and vulcanising plant, which manufactures the
   insulation covering from the raw rubber. They
   more than doubled the number of their workers
   during the five years prior to the war and were
   employing same 3500 in 1939 A section of these
   large works is now reported to be specialising
   in brass shell cases and fuses



 Engineering and Armaments

 Klockner Osnabrück (2)
   The rolling mills and hammer works of the
   Klöckner concern are on the Eastern side of
   the town North of and alongside the main East
   to West railway line. They include an open-
   hearth steelworks, iron and steel foundries,
   press and hammer shops, and rolling mills.
   Their products include railway wheels, bogies,
   and railway point installations, of which they
   are one of the principal suppliers to the German
   railways. They are now reported to be making
   shells of all calibres, and gun mountings, chiefly
   for naval use. They have also been identified
 

- 541 -

 

   as makers of rough breech pieces for tank guns
   and liners for anti-aircraft guns.

 Kromschröder      Jahnplatz (3)
 Kromschröder      Parkstr. (3)

   The G-. Kromschröder A.G. are specialists in the
   manufacture of gas meters, and small gas
   producers up to 25 h. p. , mainly for agricultural
   use. They have two factories in Osnabrück and
   employed some 700 workers before the war.

 Brück Kretschel & Co,    Kloster str.   (3)
   This firm specialises in machinery for
   briquetting plants and lime-stone quarries,
   hydraulic presses, and water turbines,

 Dreyer       Osnabrück   (3)
   The Heinrich Wilhelm Dreyer K.G. is one of
   several smaller engineering works in Osnabrück
   making agricultural machinery.

 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

 Hammersen      Iburgs tr,  (3)
   The F, H,Hammersen A.G-. are a large spinning and
   weaving concern with factories in Osnabrück,
   Rheine,and Bocholt. They employed a total of
   4,000 workers before the war. The Osnabrück
   factory is the parent works, and contains
   63,000 spimiles and 1 500 weaving looms,

 Kämmerer      Quirll's Mühle (3)
   The Papierfabrik G-.m.b,H. vorm. BrtkLer
   Käsmerer have a large paper mill to the East
   of Osnabrück and on the South side of the
   railway line. They specialise in the
   production of electrical insulating papers.


OSTERNIENBURG (Anhalt)
51° 50' N. 12° E: 520 miles:  (3,000)

 Osternienburg is a small settlement 5 miles East of Köthen which
is important as the site of the Solvay chemical plant. The pre-war
population of 3,000 will probably have been largely increased, but a
proportion of the labour will no doubt be housed in and around Köthen.

 

- 542 -

 
 Solid Fuels


 Wilhelm       Osternienburg   (3)

   The Wilhelm mine near Osternienburg belongs
   to the Deutsche Solvay Werke A.G. , whose
   chemical works are described below. This is
   an underground brown-coal mine,w hich employed
   some 400 workers before the war.

 Chemicals and Explosives

 Solvay Werke      Osternienburg   (2)
   The Deutsche Solvay Werke A.G. had a pre-war
   capacity for 20,000 tons of electrolytic
   alkali and 18,000 tons of chlorine per annum.
   It has been reported that the capacity has
   been trebled in recent years, and several
   thousand workers are now believed to be
   employed.


OSTERODE (East Prussia)
53° 40' N. 20' E:   860 miles: (19,000)


 Osterode is in the Southwestern area of the Province of East
Prussia 25 miles West of Allenstein and on the main railway from North
Germany to Insterburg and the Eastern Front. Apart from the railway
repair shops, Osterode is mainly an agricultural centre with horse
and cattle markets and a small flour-milling industry.


 Transportation

Railway Repair Shops Osterode   (3)
   These workshops, which are of some importance
   to the Eastern sections of the German railways,
   employ approximately 1 ,000 workers and under-
   take mainly the repair of goods wagons.


- 543 -

PADERBORN (Westphalia)
51° 45' N. 8° 45' E:   380 miles: (39,000)

  Paderborn is in the Eastern area of Westphalia on an important
railway line which leads from Saxony and Central Germany to Hamm and
the Lower Rhineland, It is a junction for three minor branch lines
serving the agricultural districts of Lippe and Eastern Westphalia,
and there are important railway workshops in the town. Apart from
these the activities of Paderborn are mainly connected with the
marketing of cattle and agricultural produce.
 Transportation

 Railway Repair Shops    Nordbahnhof  (3)
   The repair shops in the Northern part of
   Paderborn are alongside the branch railway
   leading to Bielefeld, These workshops
   employ some 2,400 workers and repair passenger
   coaches and goods wagons.

 Railway Repair Shops    ‘ Paderborn    (3)
   The second repair shops are situated close
   to the main railway station in the Southern
   quarter of the town. These are chiefly
   locomotive repair shops and employ some
   1 500 workers.

 Public Utility Services

 Distributing Sub-station    Paderborn   (3)

   An important distributing substation is
   situated at Paderborn. It is the terminus of
   a 220-kV line, which, starting from the main
   switching station at Brauweiler, West of Köln,
   transits power to the substations at Wesel
   (Nieder Rhein), Ibbenbüren, and Paderborn,
   which are all distribution points, Paderborn,
   200 miles distant by this route, is the terminus
   of the line.

 

PARCHIM (Mecklenburg)
53° 25' N. 11° 50' E:   520 miles: (16,000)

 Parchimis in the Southern area of Mecklenburg 25 miles South-
east of Schwerin, It is a railway junction where two minor branch
lines cross, and is a centre for the surrounding agricultural
district. There is a large cattle market, but no industries of
importance,


 

- 544 -

PASSAU (Bavaria)
35° N. 13° 30' E: 635 miles: (26,000)

 Passau is on the Southern bank of the Danube at the point
where the River Inn flows into the main stream. A trunk railway
connection through Nürnberg and Regensburg to Vienna passes through
Passau, which is on the frontier of Austria and was formerly the
Customs Station for the traffic along this railway and on the Danube.
There are a number of granite quarries for road metal and railway
ballast, but there are few other industries.

 Public Utility Services

 Electric Power Station   Kachlet  (2)
  This is a hydro-electric power station with
   a capacity of 56 MW, but designed for a final
   capacity of 70 MW. The station is on an
   island in the river Danube 2 miles upstream
   to the West of Passau. It forms part of the
   Rhein-Main-Donau scheme. A 110 kV. line
   connects to Nürnberg and a further line to
   the Austrian system.




PEINE (Hanover)
52° 20' N. 10° 15' E: 445 miles:  (18,000)

 Peine is 25 miles South-east of Hanover on the railway
line to Magdeburg. The principal industry is the large iron
works but there are a number of minor engineering works. Peine
lies South of the Hanover oilfields, and at Dollbergen, 6
 miles to the North, there is an important oil refinery. The
exploitation of these oilfields is mainly carried out from .
Misburg, which is described under the heading Hanover.

 Public Utility Services  

 Power Station      Gross Ilsede (3)
   The thermal power station of the Ilseder-
   Hdtte has an installed capacity of 30 MW.
   and is fired by blast-furnace gas. There
   are 2 transformers for additional current
   from the grid.

 Liquid Fuels and Substitutes

 Gasolin A.G.      Dollbergen (3)
   A mineral-oil refinery belonging to the
   Deutsche Gasolin A.G., which was in
   operation before the war, has been more
   than doubled in size during the past four
   years. At least one complete new
   distillation plant has been installed and
   the tank capacity greatly increased.

- 545 -


 
   Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys

    Ilseder Hütte A.G. Peine  (1)
    These important iron and steel works have
    6 blast furnaces and a coking plant. They
    have an annual capacity of 600,000 tons of
    pigiron and 750,000 tons of crude steel,
    and are equipped to produce special shapes,
    piles, girders and Joists and possibly also
    shell forgings. This company which works in
    close cooperation with the Hermann Goering
    concern, owns and is the chief exploiter of
    the iron-ore resources of the Salzgitter
    district on the Northern edge of the Hartz
    Mountains. Salzgitter is 25 miles to the
    South of Peine.
 

PEISKRETSCHAM (Silesia)
50° 20' N. 18° 35' E: 820 miles: (8,000)

    Peiskretohamis 5 miles North of Gleiwitz on the railway
   line leading from Oppeln to the Upper Silesian mining district,
   Its importance is due to the large railway marshalling yards.


 Transportation


    Marshalling Yards     Peiskretoham (2)
    The Peiskretfchain marshalling yards are
    capable of handling up to 5,000 wagons per
    24 hours. Lines radiate from this focal
    point at the entrance to the Upper Silesian
    industrial district to the three neighbouring
    centres of Gleiwitz, Hindenburg, and Beu then
    which all lie within a ten-mile radius from
    Peiskretscham. A large proportion of the
    Upper Silesian goods traffic passes through
    these important yards.

 
PETERSDORF (Silesia)
50° 50' N. 15° 35' E: 685 miles: (4,700)

   a.- Petersdorf is 8 miles South-west of Hirschbepg in Lower
   öiiesia it is on a branch railway line from Hirschberg to
   Schreiberhau in the Riesengebirge, and is a tourist resort.
   Apart from the explosives factory, there are no industries of
   importance.

- 546 -

 

 Chemicals and Explosives

Explosives Factory Petersdorf (3)
   It has been reported that an explosives
   factory has been recently established at
   Petersdorf on the South side of the rail-
   way line near to the railway station of
   Nieder Petersdorf. The building which is
   being used for thisspurpose is said to have
   been formerly an artificial-silk factory
   and may possibly be the new factory which
   the Schlesische Zellwolle A.G. of Hirschberg
   are known to have begun erecting in 1938.
   In addition to the factory building there
   are large bunker installations for the
   storage of explosives. 800 workers are said
   to have been employed in 1943.

 
PFORZHEIM (Baden)
48° 55' N. 8° 40' E: 430 miles: (80,000)

 Pforzheimis 15 miles South-east of Karlsruhe at the
Northern end of the Black Forest. It is on the main railway
line from Karlsruhe to Stuttgart, and is the Junction for two
minor branch lines leading South into the Black Forest district.
 Pforzheimis the centre of the precious, semi-precious,
and imitation Jewellery industry. It is also one of the chief
centres for clock and watch making, which is a speciality of
the Black Forest region of Baden. These industries were
formerly carried out largely in the homes of the individual
workers, and it may be said that almost every house in this
city is a small workshop, but there are two factories built
on a larger scale. Gold and silver refining is carried out
in Pforzheimin connection with this Jewellery trade.
 A.S was the case during the 1914-1918 war, most of the
factories and workshops of Pforzheim will have now been timed
over to the manufacture of precision parts for instrumenta,
small-arms components, fuzes, clockwork movements, and similar
products for which this specialist labour and plant are suited.


 Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication


Scheideanstalt  Alt städtischer Kirchenweg (3)

Heimerle & Meule östl. Karl Fr i edr. Str. (3)



   The Allgemeine Gold & Silber Scheideanstalt
   and the Heimerle & Meule K.G. are two of the
   largest of several .gold and silver refining
   factories in Pforzheim.

- 547 -

 

 Engineering and Armaments

Rodi & Wienenberger A.G. Bleichstr, (3)

Kol 1 mar & Jourdan A.G-. Bleichstr. (3)

The above are the two largest of the factories
in Pforzheim, and each employed some 1,200
workers before the war. These two finns normally
specialise in watch cases and watch chains and
are also large producers of articles of jewellery,
real and imitation. Their works are close
together in the Southern quarter of the town:

Hohmann Moser A.G-. Westl.Karl   Friedr. Str. (3)

Eugen Fessler Ostl. Karl  Friedr. Str.  3)

Moriz Hausch Durlachstr.   3)

Andreas Daub Luisenstr.   3)

Wilhelm Wolff A.G. Hohenzollern str.  3)


These firms are all manufacturers of jewellery
and fine metal articles. They each employed an
average of 300 workers before the war and are
a few of the larger of several hundred similar
and smaller works, including many which can be
classed as home workshops. With the exception
of Wilhelm Wolff, whose factory-is in the Northern
quarter of the town, the above works are in the
central area South of the railway line.

All these plants are now believed to be engaged
on the manufacture of precision parts ofr
instruments, fine aircraft and armament
components, fuzes, and similar metal parts.

Weber & Aeschbach Museumstr. (3)

Ambros Nirschl Werner  Siemens Str, 3)

The above are examples of a large number of
watch manufacturers, mostly of small individual
'size. These works are now mainly engaged on
making watches, clockwork movements etc., and
safety fuzes for military regn-j rements.

- 548 -

PIESTERITZ (Province Saxony)
51° 55' N. 12° 35' E: 545 miles: (10,000)

 Piesteritz, which is 2 miles West of Wittenberg, is
important as the site of the large chemical works, the adjacent
electxic power station and a rubber factory.

 Public Utility Services

 Electric Power Station   Piesteritz (3)
   The thermal power station belonging to the
   chemical plant described below has a capacity
   of 40 MW.

 Chemicals and Explosives

 Stickstoffwerke    Piesteritz (1)
   The large chemical works of the Mittel-
   deutsche Stickstoffwerke A.G. were merged
   into the Bayerische Stickstoffwerke A.G.
   and are now associated with the Ammoniak-
   Werke Merseburg G.m.b.H. a subsidiary of
   the I. G. Farben concern. The Piesteritz works
   are important producers of nitrogenous
   fertilisers, notably nitro-phoska and
   calcium cyanamide. Nitro-phoska is a combined
   nitrogen-phosphorus-potash fertiliser. The
   production of calcium cyanamide for the two
   plants, Piesteritz and Trostberg in Bavaria,
   is believed to be 125,000 tons per annum.
   There is also a plant at Piesteritz for the
   manufacture of concentrated nitric acid, of
   which the production is 60 tons daily.
   These works are also reported to be the
  largest producers of phosphorus in Europe.
  In 1932 it was reported that the annual
  production was approximately 30,000 tons.
  There are three 3~phase furnaces, each
  consuming 12,000 kW. In normal times a
  large part of this phosphorus was sent to
  Wolfen for the manufacture of phosphoric
  acid, itself used for makingsnitro-phoska.
  Phosphorus is used for the manufacture of
  incendiary bombs, tracer/incendiary Si A.A.,
  . simple tracer S.A.A., and larger-calibre
  tracer shells made with pyrotechnic
  compositions. Fire-raising ansnunition is
  almost entirely dependent on phosphorus.
  It is also used in smoke-producing shells
  for ranging purposes. These chemical works
  are on the Northern bank of the Elbe on
  the Western side of Piesteritz.

- 549 -
 

 Rubber and Tyres
 Gummiwerke Elbe    Piesterit2/Klein-Wittenberg (2)

   The Gummiwerke Elbe A.G. have two factories,
   one in Piesteritz and one in Kleinwittenberg
   between Piesteritz and Wittenberg. Before
   the war this firm produced bicycle and motor-
   cycle tyres, footwear, and general lubber goods.
   The plant is now believed to be making fuel-
   tank covering, respirator face-pieces, and
   protective clothing. The Piesteritz factory
   includes a reclaim plant with a capacity of
   2500 tons per annum. At the end of 1943
   seme 2,000 workers were employed. It is
   thought possible that the civilian footwear
   production has now been transferred to the
   Kleinwittenberg factory.
   The Gummiwerke Elbe A.G. is mainly owned by
   Felten and Guillaume of Cologne.

 
PILLAU (East Prussia)
54° 40' N. 19° 55' E: 860 miles: (16,000)

 Pillau is some 25 miles West of Königsberg on the
Frische N.hrung, the narrow tongue of land between the Baltic
and the Frisches Haff, a wide lagoon which forms the entrance
to the harbour of Königsberg. Pillau serves as an advanced
port for Königsberg. There is a ship-repairing depot as well
as a fishing harbour of some importance.

 Shipbuilding

 Sc hie hau     Pillau  (3)
   The Sc hie hau concern, of Danzig, which also
   has important shipbuilding yards in the port
   of Königsberg, have a well-equipped subsidiary
   yard at Pillau. There is a floating dock of
   147 feet length, and the works are believed to
   be mainly engaged on the repair of naval
   vessels and auxiliaries.

- 550 -

PINNEBERG (Holstein)
53° 40' N. 9° 48' E: 445 miles: (13,000)

 Pinneberg is situated 12 miles N. W. of Hamburg, on
the main Hamburg-Flensburg-Danish, railway route.

 Rubber and Tyres

 C.Otto Gehrckens Leder u.  Pinneberg (-)


   This firm employed 350'workers before-the
   war on leather and balata belting,
   electrioal insultation, and mechanical
   rubber goods.

 
PIRMASENS (Bavaria)
49° 10' N. 7° 35' E: 380 miles: (50,000)


 Pirmasens is in the South-western corner of the Bavarian
Palatinate and 15 miles East of Zweibrücken. It is at the
terminus of a branch railway line. The industry of the town
has been concentrated on the manufacture of boots, shoes, and
leather goods,' and it claims to be chief centre of the German
leather industry. There are several hundred boot and shoe
factories in the town, most of them small but in the aggregate
forming a production unit of the greatest importance to this
branch, and employing some 30,000 workers.
 Pinnasens manufactured in peacetime chiefly the cheaper
and lighter varieties of boots and shoes, but it is believed
that the town is now an important supplier of footwear for the
armed forces. There are a number of makers of machinery and
implements for boot and shoe making, but no other branch of
industry is represented on any large scale.


 Leather

Eduard Rheinberger A.G, Schachenstr, (3)

Neuffer Ago & Goodyear G.m.b.H Pirmasens 3)
   These firms are two of the largest boot
   and shoe factories in Pirmasens. They each
   employ some 2,000 workers, and are believed
   to be making army footwear.


Gebr. Fahr A.G. Güterbahnhof (3)
Ludwig Kopp A.G, Bahnhof str.  3)
Kaiser & Cie. Buo hsweilerst 3)
Emil Neuffer Luisenstr.  3)
Carl Sender Allee Str.  3)

   The above are examples of a large number of
   medium sized boot and shoe factories, each
   employing from 200 to 400 workers.

- 551 -


PIRNA (Saxony)
51° N. 13° 55' E: 610 miles: (36,000)

 Pima is 12 miles South-east of Dresden on the left bank
of the Elbe, and on the main railway line from North Germany
to Prague and Vienna. In addition to the factories described,
there is a considerable glass-making industry, and a number of
manufacturers of paper, chiefly writing paper.   '

 Engineering and Armaments

 Döhlen A.G-.      Pima   (3)
   The S&chsische Gusstahl Werke Döhlen A.G-.,
   whose iron and steel works are in Dresden,
   have a steel rolling plant at Pima.

 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

 Zellst offwerke    Pima   (3)
   The Aschaffenburger Zellstoffwerke A.G-. the
   parent works of which are in Aschaffenburg,
   have a large factory in Pima producing
   viscose rayon. This concern, which is an
   important producer of cellulose for paper
   making, has recently greatly developed its
   production of viscose for artificial silk,
   and two of its factories (Pima and Stockstadt)
   have been largely concentrated on this trade.

 KÄttner      Heidenauerstr. (3)
   The Fr. Küttner A.G-, have an important rayon-
   spinning mill in Pima, which is believed to
   have employed some 3500 workers before the
   war. Their output of viscose rayon and
   Cuprammonium yam was then estimated at 17
   tons per day.

 
PLANITZ (Saxony)
50° 40' N. 12° 30' E: 550 miles: (25,000)


 Planitz is 3 miles South of Zwickau. The industry consists
mainly of textiles, in particular shirts and knitted goods, and
there is also a factory which specialises in the manufacture of
wire brushes of all kinds. None is individually of importance.

- 552 -

PLAUEN (Saxony)
50° 30' N. 12° 10' E: 540 miles: (113,000)

 Plauen is in the South-western corner of Saxony. It is
an important railway Junction on the routes from North to South
through Hof and Eger. It is the centre of the hilly district
of the Vogtland, and is built in the valley of the River Elster.
In addition to textiles (in particular shirt-making, knitted
wear, and lace), which are normally the main industry, and a
large rayon factory, there is an important engineering works
and a number of other industries, including printing works,
piano and furniture factories, and makers of leather goods.

 Transportation

 Railway Junction    Plauen  (3)
   At the main railway station, which is in the
   Northern part of Plauen, the main railway line
   from Leipzig and Dresden divides into two, one
   branch leading to Hof and the other to Eger.
   These are both main lines which lead through
   the central German hills to Northern Bavaria.
   A branch line leading from Gera follows the
   River Elster and passes along the South-
   eastern outskirts of Plauen to join the main
   line to Oelsnitz and Eger 4 mil es to the South.

 Public Utility Services

 Gasworks      Plauen  (3)
   In 1936 the municipal gasworks made 350
   million cu. ft. of gas.

 Engineering and Armaments

 VOMAG       Oranachstr, (2)
   The.Vomag Maschinenfabrik A.G. are an
   important engineering works with a wide
   range of products. They were originally
   makers of printing, textile, and lace-
   making machinery, but for some years
   before the war were already noted for
   their own type of heavy transport vehicle.
   They are now believed to be making Diesel
   engines and to be producing stationary
   Diesel engines of 70-150'h.p. and possibly
   also tanks and tank engines, and various
   types of military transport, such as 18 ton
   semi-tracked troop carriers, in addition
   to machine tools and precision boring and
   grinding machinery. Their works are on the
   South-western outskirts of the town on the
   right bank of the River Elster and on the
   railway line from Plauen to Eger. They employ
   some 8,000 workers.

 - 553 -
 

 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

 Zellwolle A.G.     Plauen  (3)
   The Sächsische Zellwolle A.G. are makers
   of viscose staple fibre, of which their
   works have a capacity for 60 tons per day.
   The factory is built to the South-east of
   the town between the River Elster and the
   branch railway to Oelsnitz and Gera,

 Baumwollspinnerei    Hans Sachs Str. (3)
   The Plauener Baumwollspinnerei A.G-. have a
   cotton spinning mill with 50,000 spimiles.
   They employed some 400 workers before the
   war.



PLETTENBERG (Westphalia)
51° 13' N. 7° 52' E: 345 miles: (8,000)

 Plettenberg is a small industrial town South of Hagen;
12 miles East of Lüdenscheid and 12 miles South-east of
Altena, on a short branch railway from the main Dortmund-
Hagen-Siegen railway route. Its situation is typical of the
industrialised valleys South of Hhgen, with industrial under-
takings situated along the valley manufacturing screws and
bolts, railway equipment, and other light metal products.

 Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

 Messingwerk Plettenberg G.m.b.H. Plettenberg (-)

   This fiim are copper and brass rollers and
   fabricators and prior to the war employed
   some 300 workers. Nothing is known regarding
   the firm's present rate of activity.
 

PORZ (Rhineland)
See under KÖIN (COLOGNE)

 
PÖSSNECK (Thuringia)
50° 40' N. 11° 35' E: 510 miles: (16,000)


line   “Pes Swatll-ea³t ot Saalfeld on the railway
w,    Gera⁻ Thor° ¹⁰ a textile and leather
industry, but no factories of importance.

- 554 -

POTSDAM (Brandenburg)
52° 25' N. 13° 5' E: 565 miles: (126,000)

 Potsdam, which is 18 miles South-west of the centre of
Berlin, was the chief residence of the Hohenzollerns, and during
the reign of the German Emperors was developed into an important
military centre with extensive barrack accommodation, garrisoned
mainly by the household troops. In more recent years many of the
central administrative offices and archives of the German and
of the Prussian Governments were established in Potsdam. Apart
from the railway repair shops there are no industries, and
Potsdamis mainly a residential town, with a large proportion of
retired military and governmental officials.

 Transportation

 Railway Repair Shops    Potsdam  (2)

   These are large scale repair shops which
   employ some 3500 workers and undertake
   the repair of all kinds of rolling stock.



PREMNITZ (Brandenburg)
52° 35' N. 12° 20' E: 535 miles: (4,000)

 Premnitz is on the River Havel, 5 miles South of Rathenow
and 45 miles to the West of Berlin. Large I.G.Farben works are
established in this village, and the pre-war population Of
4,000 will by now have been greatly increased, though many of
the workers are no doubt housed in Rathenow.

 Chemicals and Explosives

 I. G. Farbenindustrie   Premnitz   (1)
   The Premnitz plant of the I.G. Farben was
   engaged in 19D+/1Q in the manufacture of
   nitrocellulose reaching a peak production
   of 1,163 tons monthly. After the last war
   it was converted to the manufacture of
   artificial fibres and greatly enlarged. It
   is believed that a great deal of nitro-
   cellulose for other than explosive purposes
   is still made and it seems almost certain
   that the production of explosive nitrocellulose
   has also been resumed to some extent. A
   number of the explosives buildings were
   retained. It is estimated that the total
   capacity for the production of nitrocellulose
   is approximately 15,000 tons per annum,
   of which perhaps one half might be available
   for explosives manufacture. The production
   of finished propellant powders has been
   reported here and it is possible that a powder
   plant of moderate size exists.
 
- 555 - 
 

   A comparatively small explosives factory
   existed during the last war near to PLAUE
   on the river Havel 9 miles South-east of
   Premnitz. It is now reported that an
   explosives factory, said to be State owned
   and on a large scale, is in operation at
   or near this site. No reliable figures
   are available as to production.
   A small subsidiary plant of the I. G. Farben
   has also been reported as having been
   erected during the war at Dbberitz, a
   small village one mile South of Premnitz
   (not to be confused with the military camp
   of Dbberitz 30 miles East of Premnitz
   and within 15 miles of Berlin).

 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

   I. G. Farbenindu s t rie    Premnit    (3)
   Before the war the Premnitz factory of the
   I.G. concern was primarily engaged on
   producing viscose rayon and staple fibre,
   It had an output of 60 tons per day.
   Ground reports suggest that the works was
   still operating at full capacity in 1942.

 
PRENZLAU (Brandenburg)
53° 20' N. 13° 50' E: 600 miles: (27,000)

   Prenzlau is in that area in the Northern part of the
 Province of Brandenburg which is known as the Uckermark.
 It is 55 miles North of Berlin, and 23 miles West of Stettin.
 It is an agricultural centre and has a large cattle market.
 There are a few small engineering works and iron foundries,
 and also a margarine factory, but no industry of importance.


- 556 -


QUEDLINBURG (Province Saxony)
51° 45' N. 11° 10' E: 485 miles: (28,000)


 Quedlinburg is 10 miles South of Halberstadt and. at
the Eastern end. of the Hartz Mountain area. It is chiefly
known as the centre of the nursery-gardening and. seed-growing
industries, and is particularly important as the largest
producer of sugar-beet seed. The manufacture of sugar fran
beet was first developed in the Prussian province of Saxony
(largely by Gustav Adolf Dippe, the founder of Gebrüder Dippe
A.G.)
and this is still one of the principal sugar-beet areas.
There are a number of engineering works in Quedlinburg,
including several makers of thermometers for industrial use,
and a railway-wagon factory.


 Engineering and Armaments


  Ernst Meyer & Co.     Quedlinburg (-)

  The Ernst Mayer & Co. Eisenbahn-Material
  G.m.b.H. Waggonfabrik are small builders
  of railway wagons.

  Wegener & Mach       Quedlinburg   (3)
  Baecker & Spengler     Rambergsweg  3)


  Wegener & Mach and the Deutsche Thermemeter-
  fabrik Baecker & Spengler are two of several
  firms in Quedlinburg specialising in thermo-
  meters of all types, including those for use
  in furnaces and steam engines and for other
  industrial purposes.


 Foodstuffs

  Gebr. Dippe A.G. Neuer Weg (3)

  Heinrich Mette & Co. G.m.b.H. Stumpsburger-str. 3)
  
  The above firms are two of the largest of
  several seed growers in Quedlinburg. They
  are important suppliers of sugar-beet seecQ
  of which Quedlinburg is estimated to produce
  40 per cent of the total German requirements.


 - 557 -


RADEBERG (Saxony)
51° 5' N. 13° 55' E: 610 miles:  (16,000)

  Radeberg is 10 miles North-east of Dresden on the main railway
line from Dresden to Bautzen and Silesia. °ie principal manufacture
is glass, particularly for use in lamp-fittings, mirrors, and
furniture. There are several furniture makers, and an engineering
firm of some importance.

 Engineering and Armaments
  Eschebach Werke A.G.     Radeberg   (2)

  The Eschebach Werke A.G. are makers of cooking
   ranges, kitchen furniture and fittings, and
   domestic appliances. Their works include an iron
   foundry. They employed some 1,200 workers before
   the war. They are now reported to be large suppliers
   of field cookers, food containers, and other
   similar equipment for the armed forces
 

RADEBEUL (Saxony)
51° 5' N. 13° 40' E: 600 miles: (37,000)

  Radebeul is on the right bank of the Elbe 5 miles downstream from
Dresden, and is one of a number of settlements which lie along the
Elbe between Dresden and Meissen. Radebeul, which now includes the
adjoining suburbs of Kotscheribroda and Niederlössnitz, is largely a
residential offshoot of Dresden, but there is also considerable
industrial activity.

 Public Utility Services

  Electric Power Station    Niederwartha (2)
  The Niederwartha or Elbtal pumped-storage station
   of the Energie-Versorgung-Gross-Dresden A.G. (EGRO),
   lies 6 miles North-west of the centre of Dresden on
   the left bank of the Elbe. It is a peak—load and
   emergency standby station with an average annual
   output of 160 million kWh and an installed capacity
   of 80 MW. There are two reservoirs, with a difference
   in altitude of 470 feet. Water from the upper
   reservoir passes through 4 concrete pipes to the
   intake chamber and from thence through a penstock
   to the power house.

  In the generator hall 4 turbo-generator sets are
   installed (with provision for 8). Each generator
   motor is connected to a generator transformer for
   10—20—100 kV. An indoor 20—kV substation supplies 8
   cables to Dresden municipality and the ASW plants,
   and 2 cables to Preitai. An outdoor 100—kV substation
   supplies 4 direct double-circuit lines to Chemnitz
   North, Lauta, Hirschfelde, and Dresden South.

- 558 -

 Gasworks       Radebeul   (3)
   The Dresdner Gas-Wasser-u. Elektrizitätswerk A.G.
   (DREWAG) supplies gas through the Verbandsgaswerk
   Elbtal to Radebeul. Ill million cubic feet of gas
   were sold in 1936.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Curt Holzberger      Kotitzerstr. (3)
   This firm specialises in the manufacture of wrenches
   and spanners, and is the leading German manufacturer
   of these articles.

 Gebier Werke A.G.     Martin Mutschmann Str. (3)
   This firm of iron founders specialises in cast- and
   wrought-iron containers and apparatus, chiefly for
   the chemical, oil, and food stuffs industries. They
   employed some 500 workers before the war.

 Auerbach       Stosch Sarrasani Str. (3)
   The Dresdner Werkzeugmaschinenfabrik Carl Auerbach
   & Sohn Gwnub.H. are makers of precision lathes and
   machinery, including apparatus for instrument
   making and the optical industry.

 August Koebig     Meissenerstr. (-)

   The Radebeuler Maschinenfabrik August Koebig
   G.nub.H. are makers of machinery for the paper-making
   and textile-finishing industries. They employed
   some 300 workers before the war.

 Chemicals and Explosives

  Von Heyden A.G.     Meissenerstr. (3)
   The Chemische Babrik von Heyden A.G. employed some
   2,000 workers before the war, and are important
   manufacturers of pharmaceuticals and medical
   preparations, chlorine products, phenol, electrolytic
   alkali, and various other chemicals for industrial use.
   It was reported in 194-2 that this firm was making large
   quantities of phosgene gas, ostensibly for de-lousing
   purposes.
 

     RAGNIT (East Prussia)
See under Tilsit.

- 559 -

RASTATT (Baden)
48° 50' N. 8° 15' E: 410 miles: (15,000)

 Rastatt is 12 miles South of Karlsruhe on the main North
to South railway line along the Rhine valley to Basle. It is
the Junction for a connecting line which crosses the Rhine
3 miles to the West of Rastatt and Joins the railway following
the Western bank of the river to Strassburg. A branch line
leads South-east from Rastatt into the Black Forest region.
There are a number of small industries, including the making
of special paper for blue prints and drawing-office use, coloured
papers, and stationery. There is also a clothing factory. Kone
of these is individually of importance, but the optical
instrument firm of Ernst Leitz G.m.b.H. of Wetzlar has a branch
in the town.

 Engineering and Armaments

  Ernst Leitz G.nub.H.     Rastatt   (3)
  The important optical-instrument concern of
 Ernst Leitz G.nub.H., whose parent works are
 at Wetzlar, have a branch factory in Rastatt
 making frames, stands, and other accessories
 for optical instnments.

  Waggonfabrik Rastatt A.G.   Rastatt   (3)
  The Waggonfabrik Rastatt A.G. are makers of
 main-line wagons and they also build tram-
 cars. In 1938 some 500 workers were
 employed.
 

RASTENBURG (East Prussia)
54° 5' N. 21° 25' E:   915 miles:  (17,000)

 Rastehburg is 60 miles South-east of Konisberg in the
central area of the Province of East Prussia. It has a large
cattle market and is the centre of a rich agricultural district
Other than a sugar refinery and a flour mill, there is no industry
of importance.

 Foodstuffs

  Zuckerfabrik     Rastehburg (-)

  The Zuckerfabrik Rastehburg A.G. is a sugar
 refinery whose annual output rose to 8,000
 tons in 1938. Some 700 workers were employed
 during the sugar-beet season.

- 560 -


RATHENOW (Brandenburg)
52° 35' N. 12° 20' E:  535 miles: (31,000)

 Rathenow is 40 miles West of Berlin on the min line to Hannover.
It is on the right bank of the river Havel 20 miles South East of its
confluence with the Elbe at Havelberg. Rathenow's chief industry
ia the manufacture of optical instruments and spectacles. The firm of
Emil Büsch is one of the pioneers of the German optical industry.
During the last century this manufacture became a speciality of the
town, and there are now a large number of optical instruments (and
particularly spectacle)
manufacturers. In peacetime no other indus-
tries are represented on any large scale, but the aircraft works have
now became important.

  Five miles South of Rathenow at Premnitz there is an importnat
I.G. Farben plant, which is dealt with separately under, the heading
Premnitz.

 Aircraft and Aero-Engines

  Arado       Rathenow    (2)
  The Rathenow works of the Arado Flugzeugwerke
  G-.m.b.H. are an air frame components plant
  producing wings, tail units and undercarriages
  for Arado seaplanes (ar.95 and 196). These
  components are delivered to the Brandenburg
  works of Arado for Assembly. Some repairs
  are also carried out. The number of workers
  anployed in 1941 was 3500.

 Engineering and Armaments


Emil Busch  Brandenburgerstr. (3)
Emil Busch Am Stadthof 3)

  The Bail Busch A.G. Optische Industrie is an
  old established firm of optical instrument
  and lens manufacturers, which is now owned by
  Carl Zeiss of Jena. Their normal range of
  products include all kinds of camera and
  other lenses, complete cameras, optical bomb-
  sights, telescopes, field glasses, microscopes,
  and other optical instruments. Their chief
  works are in the centre of the town, and there
  is a subsidiary factory chiefly for glass
  moulding, which is situated "Am Stadthof on
  the bank of the Havel.
  The Busch works also make the precision metal
  parts for the optical instruments.
  Some 2,000 workers were employed before the
  war and although reports state that this
  number has now been doubled, the Busch works
  do not compare in importance with the various
  Zeiss factories or with Leitz of Wetzlar.


Nitsche & Gunther IXirickerstr. (3)

  The Nitsche & Gunther Optische Werke K.G. are
  makers of optical instruments and special
  machinery for this industry, including lens
  polishing apparatus. They supply instrument
  components to the Busch works. They are
  believed to employ some 1,200 workers.

 - 561 -
 
 Franz Rapsch     Jahns tr   (3)

  The Franz Rapsch Optische Fabriken A.G.
   employed some 250'workers before the war
   and is an example of a large number of
   anal! undertakings in Rathenow which
   specialise in the simpler forms of lenses
   and other optical products, chiefly as sub-
   contractors to larger firms. Such "manu-
   facturers" frequently do no more than the
   finishing processes (grinding, polishing,
   etc.) , however, are highly skilled
   operations.



RATIBOR (Silesia)
50° 5' N. 18° 15' E:  805 miles: (51,000)

 Ratibor is 30 miles South-west of Gleiwitz, within 3 miles of
the Polish border to the East and 6 miles of the Czechoslovakian border
to the South-west. The town is built on either bank of the Oder and
is on the main railway line from Oppeln to Oderberg. At Oderberg
this railway Joins the main West to East line connecting the Czecho-
slovakian and Polish coal-mining areas. The Oder, $hich is navigable,
forms an important inland-waterway connection with Mährisch Ostrau.
The principal industry in Ratibor is the Siemens-Plania factory.

 Transportation

 Railway Repair Shops     Ratibor  (3)
  These medium-sized repair shops undertake the
   repair of goods wagons.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Siemens-Plania      Ratibor  (2)
  The Ratibor factory of the Siemens-Plania
   Werke A.G., whose parent works are in Berlin-
   Lichtenberg, is now reported to have been
   considerably enlarged and to be employing
   as many as 3,000 workers. This concern is
   the leading German producer of carbon
   electrodes of all kinds.

 Hegenscheit      Sandstr.   (3)
  The Wilhelm Hegenscheit K.G. are marnifacturers
   of screw-making machinery, lathes of all sizes,
   and other machine tools. They were reported
   to be employing seme 1500 workers in 1942,
   including Ps/W. The main works of this firm
   are in Ratibor, but there is a branch factory,
   which includes an iron foundry, at Ratiborhanmer,
   which is 10 miles North of Ratibor.

 - 562 -

 Ganz & Co.      Ratibor   (3)
   Ganz & Co, Elektrizitäts Maschinen Waggon
   4 Schiffbau A.G. is a'branch of the Ganz &
   Co., A.G. of Budapest. Their plant at
   Ratiboe comprises an iron foundry and press
   and hammer works. The products include
   railway point installations, tank wagons,
   components, plates and frames for railway
   wagons and locomotives. They were reported
   to be employing 1,000 workers in 1943.
 

RATINGEN (Rhineland)

    See under Dusseldorf.
 

RAVENSBURG (Württemberg)
47° 45' N. 9° 35' E:  505 miles: (33,000)

  Ravensburg is 10 miles North of Friedrichshafen on the direct
railway line from Ulm to Friedrichshafen. It is mainly a cattle
market and agricultural centre for the dairy products of this
area. In addition to the Escher Wyss engineering concern there
are a few smaller engineering works, saw-mills, and makers of
brushes, in particular paint brushes.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Escher Wyss     Ravensburg (3)

   The Escher Wyss Maschinenfabrik G.m.b.H.,
   a branch of the well-known Swiss firm,
   employed some 700 workers before the war
   and are makers of pumps, water turbines,
   compressors, and paper making machines.

 
RECKLINGHAUSEN (Westphalia)
51° 37' N. 7° 12' E:  315 miles: (88,000)

  The area described here surrounds the town of Recklinghausen
and lies on the northern edge of the Ruhr industrial area: it is
bounded by the Rhein-Herne canal in the South and by the Dortmund-
Ems canal in the North-east. In the west it extends towards Marl
and Huis.

 Recklinghausen lies about 15 miles North-west of Dortmund^ and
includes the suburbs of Recklinghausen-Ost and Recklinghausen-Sud.
The town is concerned maihly with the production of coal and coke.
It is served by the Rhein-Herne canal.

  Included in the area are the smaller towns of Herten with a

- 563 -

 

 population of about 33,000 and Oer-Erkensohwick with 16,000.

Transportation

 Railway Repair Shops     Recklinghausen (3)
   These extensive railway-repair shops lie
   to the South east of Recklinghausen about
   halfway between the city and Recklinghausen-
   sed. They are engaged on the repair and
   maintenance of goods wagons.

 Recklinghausen Hafen     Recklinghausen- Sud   (3)

   The municipal harbour serving Recklinghausen
   and district is on the Rheine-Heme Canal
   just west of the sixth set of twin looks
   (see also under Herne).

 Public Utility Services

 StÄdtisohe Gaswerke     Recklinghausen (3)
   Owned by V.E.W., this municipal gasworks is
   on the Ruhr gas grid. It purchased and
   sold 161 million cubic feet of gas in 193&

 Solid Fuels

 Ewald Fortsetzung coking plant    0er-Erkenschwick(3)
   Owned by the Bergbau A. G. Ewald-König Ludwig
   (now part of Heimann Göring combine), this
   coking plant lies 3^ miles North east of
   Recklinghausen and just South west of Oer-
   Erkensohwiok, adjoining Ewald Fortsetzung
   I & III colliery. The plant consists of
   200 ovens having an estimated annual dry
   ooal capacity of 1,225,000 tons.

 König Ludwig TV & V coking plant   Suderwich (3)
   This coking plant, also owned by the
   Bergbau A.G. Ewald-Konig Ludwig, is sit-
   uated just South-east of the suburb of
   Suderwich about 2 mil es East of Reckling-
   hausen station. It has 60 ovens and an
   estimated annual dry coal capacity of
   454,000 tons. Gas is supplied to the
   Ruhr gas grid.

 König Ludwig I & II coking plant   Rollinghausen (3)
   The third coking plant of the Bergbau A.G.
   Ewald-König Ludwig lies about 2j mil es
   South east of Recklinghausen station at
   Rollinghausen. It has 140 ovens and an
   estimated annual diy coal capacity of
   300,000 tons.

 - 564 -

Recklinghausen I coking plant  Hochlamark (3)
 This coking plant, owned by the Harpener
 Bergbau,A. G., lies 3^ miles due South
 of Recklinghausen main station. It has
 60 ovens and an estimated annual dry coal
 capacity of 110,000 tons. Gas is supplied
 to the Ruhr gas grid. The adjacent coal
 shaft is not working, see under Reckling-
 hausen II

Schägel & Eisen III & IV coking plant     Langeribockum (3)
 Owned by Hibernia A. G., this coking plant
 lies 3-J miles due West of Recklinghausen
 station. It has 184 ovens, with an
 estimated annual dry coal capacity of
 370,000 tons.

Schlägel u-Eisen l/ll, IIl/lV, and V/VI colliery Recklinghausen (3)
 Owned by the Bergwerksgesellschaft Hibernia
 A.G. Heme, these pits are divided into
 three groups lying about 4 miles to the West
 of Recklinghausen and within 2j miles of
 each other. The coking plant mentioned
 above adjoins pits III/IV. The total out-
 put of hard coal from these pits in 1937
 amounted to 1,112,000 tons, and the number
 of workers was 2500.

General Blumentahl Colliery   Recklinghausen (3)
 The colliery is owned by the Bergwerks-
 gesellschaft Hibernia A.G. Heme. It
 comprises pits l/ll/V/VI and III/IV which
 lie within a mile of each other directly
 East and South-east of Recklinghausen main
 station. In 1937 the output of hard coal
 amounted to 988,000 tons and the workers
 numbered some 2,400.

Recklinghausen II Colliery    Recklinghausen- Sud  (3)
 Owned by the Harpener Bergbau A. G. this
 colliery lies 5 miles S.S.W. of Reckling-
 hausen main station. In 1937, some
 930,000 tons of hard coal were mined and
 the workers numbered approximately 1,900.
 The coking plant operated by this company
 is situated at Recklinghausen I (see
 above). No coal has been hauled at this latter
 pit since 1931.

- 565 -

   Ewald I/II (Hilger & Hagedorn), V, and IIl/lV (Schurenburg &  R^cklinghausen- Waldthausen), VI.    Sud  (3)
    Situated about 4% miles South-west of
    Recklinghausen main station, this colliery
    is operated on two groups, Shafts l/ll/V
    and III/IV/VI. It is owned by the Bergbau-
    A.G. Ewald-Konig Ludwig, The output of
    hard coal in 1937 was 2,366,000 tons and
    workers numbered 4500 Rail connection
    is to Recklinghausen-Sud and water connection
    is to West Barbour at Wanne-Eickel.

   Ewald Fortsetzung Colliery    Oer- Erkenschwick (3)
    This colliery is owned by the Bergbau A. G.
    Ewald-Konig Ludwig. In 1931 all shafts
    were out of production. It was expected
    to put I/II/III into production again in
    1938. In 1936, the König-Ludwig IV/V
    took over Ewald-Fortsetzung IV/V and the
    hard coal output for 1937 amounted to
    15,000 tons. 940 workers were employed.
    The colliery is situated about 3g- miles
    North-east of Recklinghausen.

   König Ludwig Collieries   Rollinghausen and Suderwich (3)
    Owned by the Bergbau-A. G. Ewald-Konig
    Ludwig; the colliery is divided into three
    groups of shafts. Groups 1/ll/lIl/lV and
    VII/VIII lie about 3 miles South-east of
    Recklinghausen main station and group IV/V
    (which also hauls coal from Ewald Fortset-
    zung IV/V - see above) lies about 2 miles
    East of Recklinghausen main station. The
    output of coal in 1937 was 2,707,000 tons
    and the number of workers employed was
    7,000. Water connection is to the Rhein-
    Herne Canal.

 Engineering and Armaments

   Biscoff-Werke K.G.    Recklinghausen- vorm.Pfingstanann-Werke A. G.  Sud  (3)
    This plant is situated on the eastern side
    and adjacent to Recklinghausen-Sud station.
    Production includes wheel components, narrow-
    gauge locomotives and waggons and goods
    waggons, also metal mine trams. w
    The firm has another plant at Ludinghausen.

 - 566 -

REGENSBURG (Bavaria)
49° N. 12° 5' E:   570 miles: (87,000)

  Regensburg is on the South bank of the Danube 60 miles North of
Munich, and is an important railway junction and transhipment port.
The Danube is navigable as far as Regensburg for barges up to 1,000 tons
and goods can therefore be carried from the Black Sea and the Balkans
up to Regensburg without transhipment. This port is now of part inula r
value in view of the large amount of Roumanian oil which is shipped to
it up the Danube.

  The pre-war industries of Regensburg also included shipbuilding,
the manufacture of tiles, drainage pipes and stoneware, and several
small engineering works. There are a number of saw-mills, and the
inland port handled a large amount of timber. The Regensburg works
of the Messerschmitt A.G., have been greatly developed during the war.

  The VAWAG have a large alumina works at Schwandorf, 15 miles to
the North on the river Nab, which flows into the Danube 3 miles West
of Regensburg. These works are described under the heading of
Schwandorf.

 Transportation

 Inland Harbour      Regensburg (2)
  The inland harbour is to the East of the town and
   on the right bank of the Danube. It has been
   greatly extended in recent years. In addition to
   the two original docks, there is now a system of
   four large docks further to the East opening out
   of an entrance basin two miles upstream from the
   town. This inland port is of great importance to
   the traffic in oil from Roumania, a large proportion
   of which is transhipped at Regensburg.

 Railway Junction     Regensburg (3)
  Two important main railway lines, from Nurnberg
   eastwards to Passau and Vienna, and from Hof
   southwards to Munich, meet in Regensburg and, after
   passing through the railway station, diverge again
   to the East of the town.

 Marshal ling Yards      Regensburg (3)
  The Regensburg marshalling yards are capable of
   handling up to 2,000 wagons per 24 hours.

 Railway Repair Shops     Regensburg (3)
  These are medium-sized repair shops undertaking
   the repair of goods wagons.

 Public Utility Service

 Substation      Regensburg (3)
  The 110 kV long distance double circuit line from
   Landshut to Schwandorf, which connects to the grid
   of the Bayernwerk by a double circuit line to

- 567 -

    Amberg, is linked to the 110 kV long distance
   double circuit line from Kachlet to Gebersdorf
   (Nürnberg) at this substation

    The projected 220 kV long distance line from
   Kachlet to G-ebersdorf will pass through this
   substation^ From G-ebersdorf it will branch
   South to Ellwangen and North to the industrialized
   areas of Leipzig and Bitterfeld, Golpa-Zschornewitz
   and Diesdorf.


  Liquid Fuels and Substitutes


   Oil Storage       Regensburg (2)
    There are large scale oil storage facilities in
   the port area of Regensburg, and the numerous tanks
   have a total storage capacity of several hundred
   thousand tons. Three small oil refineries of the
   Ossag D.A.P.G. and Danubia are now less important
   as refineries than as storage depots for the large
   quantities of Romanian oil which pass through
   this port.

  Aircraft and Aero-Engines

   Messerschnitt A.G.      Prüfening (2)
   Messerschnitt A.G.      Obertraubling 2)

    The Messerschmitt concern of Augsburg built their
   first big branch works in 1937 on a site occupying
   a large area to the West of the town adjacent to the
   former civil airport on the Southern bank of the
   Danube inside the bejid which the river makes North
   of the village of Prüfening. Production began in
   1938 and the plant has concentrated ever since on
   successive models of the Me. 109 single-engined
   fighter. With the expansion programme instituted
   in the German aircraft industry in 1942-43 output
   increased considerably until the effective daylight
   air attack of August 1943.


    A second Messerschmitt plant has been established by
    the conversion and extension of a former G.A.F.
    station at Obertraubling, 4 miles to the South-east
    of Regensburg. This works was engaged on the
    assembly of the large Messerschmitt transport glider,
    (the Me.321) and of the powered version of the same
    aircraft (the 6-engined Me.323). The August attack
    on Prüfening was so effective that Me. 109 assembly
    was for the most paid; transferred to Obertraubling,
    while Me. 321 and 323 assembly began at Leipheim
    where assembly space had been acquired. Reconstruction
    of the Prüfening works was vigorously undertaken and
    production resumed. A series of raids in February
    1944 inflicted such severe damage that the plant is
    thought likely to be abandoned. Obertraubling was
    bombed in the same February raids with equal effective-
    ness and no attempts at assembly repair work had been

- 568 -

   macle by early April. Some assembly hangars are,
   however, still usable.

   The Regensburg complex was up to August 1943
   employing some 10,000 workers.

  Shipbuilding

   Ruthof          (3)
   The Regensburg yards of the Christof Ruthof K.G.
   are on the South quay of the Petroleum Hafen,
   one of the older docks of the inland harbour
   immediately to the East of the town. They build
   and repair oil barges, tugs and other small craft,
   and the broadside slipway has a capacity for 6
   such craft to be under construction at the same time.

   Hitzler         (3)
   The shipyards of the Theodor Hitzler Schiffswerft
   & Maschinenfabrik Regensburg are on the Northern
   side and at the entrance of the Luitpoldhafen and
   nearly opposite to the Ruthof yards. They have
   two broadside slipways with water frontages of 220
   and 425 feet respectively. The types of craft are
   similar to those built by the Ruthof yards.

  Chemicals and Explosives

   Bayerische A.G.     Kelheim   (-)

   At Kelheim-Affecking, which is 11 miles downstream
   from Regensburg on the left bank of the Danube, the
   Bayerische A.G. fur chemische & landwirtschaftlich-
   chemische Fabrikate have a chemical works manufacturing
   chiefly sulphuric acid by the contact process with an
   annual capacity of 16,000 tons.

  Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

   Zellwolle A. G.     Kelheim   (3)
   The S&ddeutsche Zellwolle A.G. have a works at Kelheim,
   11 miles South-west of Regensburg, making staple fibre
   and artificial wool. In 1938 the daily capacity of
   this works was 70 tons of staple fibre and 55 tons of
   artificial wool Some 800 workers were employed.

- 569 -

REICHENBACH (Saxony)
50° 35' N' 12° 20' E: 545 miles: (33,000)

   Reichenbach (Vogtland) is in the South-western area
  of Saxony 10 miles South-west of Zwickau on the railway
  line from Zwickau to Plauen. The industry is mainly
  textile, and there are a large number of spinning and
  weaving mills and cloth factories which, though individually
  of no great size, have a considerable aggregate production.
  There are several, small engineering works and a firm of
  measuring Instrument makers. There is also a large scale
  printing works.


  Engineering and Armaments


Mass-Industrie Zwickauer s tr. (3 )


     The Mass-Indus tide (km. b. H. are makers
     of micrometer gauges and precision
     measuring instruments of all kinds.
     They are of some importance in this branch.


 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

   Georg Schieber Altstadt (-)

     The Färbereien & Appreturanstalten
     Georg Schieber A.(k are dyers and
     textile finishers. In 1938 they
     employed some 1,200 workers at their
     two factories in Reichenbach and in
     Greiz, which is in Thuringia and 5
    miles West of Reichenbach.

 
REICHENBACH2 (Silesia)
50° 45' N. 16° 40' E: 730 miles: (18,000)


   Reichenbach am Eulengebirge is 30 miles South-west
   of Breslau and is on the railway line from Liegnitz via
   Neisse to Gleiwitz, It is mainly an agricultural centre
   and has a large cattle market. There are a number of
   cotton weaving mills, but the industry is not on a large
   scale.
 

      REIGERSFELD (Upper Silesia)

     See under Bleohhammer
 

REINSDORF

     See under Torgau
 
- 570 -

REMSCHEID (Rhineland)
51° 11' N. 7° 10' E: 350 miles: (124,000)

    The Remscheid district is bounded on the East, West
   and North by the river Wupper and extends South as far as
   Wermelskirchen. Covering an area of about 40 square miles,
   it includes the following: Lennep, Löttringhausen, Blieding-
   hausen, Lennep-Glocke, and Wermelskirchen.

    Remscheid originated in a group of small villages which
   were gradually amalgamated by their common interest in light-
   engineering into a city which has become an important centre
   for machine tools. There are no large works in Remscheid with
   the exception of the Alexanderwerk A.G. and the very inportant
   Deutsche Edelstahl - Bergische Stahlindustrie complex. Other
   firms specialise in the manufacture of precision instruments,
   machine tools, as well as sill types of iron and steel goods.

 Transportation

    Railway repair shops   Remscheid (3)

     The Remscheid railway-repair shops
    enployed 500 workers on the repair
    and maintenance of goods wagons before
    the war. They lie adjoining the Remscheid
    main station.

 Public Utility Services

    Stfidtische Gaswerke   Remscheid (3)

     The municipal gasworks purchased and
    sold 415,000,000 cubic feet of gas in
    1936.

 Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys

    Deutsche Edel Stahlwerke A. G. and Bergische Stahlindustrie Remscheid (1)    

     These two adjacent plants, controlled
    by Vereinigte Stahlwerke A. G', operate
    as one complex. They lie adjoining
    the southern side of Remscheid main
    station and conprise rolling-mills,
    drop-forging plant and shops for the
    treatment of special steels. In addition
    to the usual range of finished products,
    the works specialises in the manufacture
    of tool steel in the form of oast and
    high-speed steel, and the best quality of
    malleable iron and forgings etc. for
    aero-engines and crankshafts. It has
    been reported that bombs and shells are
    also being produced. During the war,
    the plant has been enlarged and modernised
    and the basic steel furnaces have mostly
    been replaced by electric and open-hearth
    furnaces. It is estimated that the
    
- 571 -

    total special steel capacity of this
    works is 38,000 tons per annum' The
    complex is thought to be by far the
    most important industrial concern in
    Remscheid' The alloy-steels which are
    manufactured include silicon-manganese,
    chrcme-tungsten, nickel-molybdenum
    and vanadium-cobalt, as well as various
    types of cutting steels. 5500 workers
    are believed to have been employed by
    the two plants in June 1F42.


    Bergische Stahl, Walz-u. Hammer- Werke Julius Lindenberg.  Hasten   (3)

    This is a small works engaged on the
    manufacture and fabrication of special
    steel.


    Gewerkschaft Reckharamer & Co. Löttringhausen (3)
    A small steelworks with a capacity of
    18,000 tons of special steel per annum.


 Engineering and Armaments

    Alexanderwerk A. von der Remscheid (2)
    Nahmen A.G. 1) Kippdorfstr. 2)
	2) Königstr. 2)

    The plant is on a site of 301,000 square
    metres with approximately 56,000 built-up.
    Besides a branch factory at Witten, the
    company has two plants in Remscheid which
    produced, prior to the war, agricultural
    machinery, machines for the chemical
    industry, and machine tools. Workers are
    now estimated to number 2,600 and production
    is concerned with special machinery for the
    chemical industry, M.T. components, S.A'
    components, and some agricultural implements.
    It is also reported that aircraft parts are
    being produced. The plant comprises casting
    and tempering foundries, stamping and
    pressing shops, enamelling and galvanising
    works, and machine shops.
    The two works are known as
     1) Alexanderwerk
     2) Luisenhfltte

Walter Hentzen A Co. Remscheid (3)
   This factory, formerly known as Bergische
   Werkzeugindustrie W. Hentzen & Co.,
   occupies an area of 5,100 square metres
   in a site of 15500 square metres, South-
   east of Remscheid main station. Plant
   includes machine shops and a tempering
   foundry. Workers are estimated to number
   some 700' The works specialises in the
   production of small precision tools'

- 572 -

Westdeutsche PrÄzisions- Werkzeugfabrik Remscheid, Vieringhausen (3)

This plant specialises in the manufacture
of twist drills and small tools. It lies
North-west of Güldenwerth station.

Pritz Hflrxthal Remscheid, Kirchhofstr. (-)


Plano milling machines, boring bars
and cutter heads all produced by this
firm, which occupies a site of 3,000
square metres in an area of 5,300 square
metres, just North of the Remscheid main
station. Approx. 150'workers were
employed before the war.

W.F. Klingelnberg Söhne 1) Remscheid-Berghausen (3)  
Berghauserstr.  54/62   (3)  
2) Remscheid- Preyersmflhle )

This firm operates three factories in all.
Works I produces machine knives and shear
blades. Works II, iron and steel forgings,
grinding and polishing machines; a third
works at Hückeswagen, South-east of Remscheid
manufactures machine tools. Prior to the
war this firm made a special type of bevel
gear grinder. Prior to the war, 500 workers
were employed.

A. Ludwig Steinmetz A. G. Remscheid, Berghauserstr.  12a (3)
 

450'workers are believed to be employed
here on the manufacture of precision tools.
These include milling cutters, reamers
centre and twist drills, threading tools,
and special measuring equipment.

David Kotthaus A. G. Remscheid (3)
 A variety of tools and machine tools
 are manufactured by this firm which is
 situated just North of the Remscheid
 main station.


Friedrich Wilhelm Daum Remscheid-Bliedinghausen (3)  


 This works makes railway equipment,
 safety and other high grade apparatus,
 railway switch points and machinery
 for the mining industry. The works
 consist of machine, wood-working, and
 hammer works.

- 573 -

  Albert Strasmann    Remscheid-Ehringhausen (3)        

   Besides specialising in precision
   tools, particularly polishers, tool
   grinders, milling cutters, reamers
   and threading tools, this firm
   manufactures machines and equipment
   for the production of locomotive and
   wagon parts. There are believed to
   be about 1,000 workers.

  Deutsche Spiralbohrer-/u.  Weikzeugfabriken G.m.b.H.  Remscheid Vieringhausen (3)     

   The plant specialises in the manufacture
   of twist drills and other precision tools.
   Plant consists of machine shops and
   forging plant. 500 workers are believed
   to be employed at the factory, which lies
   South-west of Vieringhausen station.

  Joh. Friedrich Ohler   1 & 2) Vieringhausen (3)
  							3 ) Reinshagen

   This fim has three works in Remscheid:-

   1) Produces segnantal saw blades;
   2) Produces automatic saw-sharpening machines;
   3) Consists of machine shops producing parts for the first two works.

   Some 400 workers were employed before
   the war.

  J. Gottlieb Peiseler    Remscheid-Haddenbach (-)
        

   This plant comprises machine shops and
   file works. Tools and files are
   produced, and there were some 200
   workers before the war.

  Ernst von der Steiner & Co.   Remscheid-Hasten (-)
        

   This is a small works comprising
   grinding, polishing, turning and
   hardening plant. Circular saws,
   and circular cutting knives are
   produced. There were 150'workers
   before the war.

  Carl l&hlhoff    Remscheid.-Luttringhausen (-)
        

   This works is engaged on the
   production of twist drills and
   reamers. Some 150'workers were
   employed before the war.

- 574 -

 "Rhewum" Rheinische Werkzeug-und Me tall Warenfabrik (km.b.H  Rems ehe id- Löttringhausen (-)


   Pressing, stamping, drawing, and
   turning tools, grinding and polishing
   wheels etc., are produced by this firm.
   There were some 30O workers before the
   war.


Mannesmannröhren-Werke A.G.  Remscheid- Bliedinghausen (3)


   The Remacheid branch of this firmis
   situated Just South-west of the Menning-
   hausen goods station. The plant includes
   three rolling mills producing steel
   tubes.


RENDSBURG (Schleswig Holstein)
54° 20' N. 9° 40' E: 455 miles: (20,000)

 Rendsburg is on the Kiel Canal 16 miles West of Kiel.
The town is intersected by the River Elder, which joins the
Kiel Canal at this point. Rendsburg is on the main line
Northwards from Hamburg to Flensburg and Denmark, which here
crosses the Kiel Canal. It is an important agricultural centre
and is the principal livestock market for the cattle producing
area of Schleswig Holstein, Apart from railway repair shops
there are no industries of importance.

 Transportation

 Railway Junction    Rendsburg (3)

   The railways from Hamburg (via Neumünster)
   and from Kiel meet at Rendsburg and lead
   Northwards to Flensburg and Denmark. The
   lines cross the Kiel Canal and the River
   Eider on bridges which are inside the town
   area. A branch line leads Westwards from
   Rendsburg to Husum on the North Sea coast.

 Railway Repair Shops    Rendsburg (3)

   These repair shops undertake the repair of
   locomotives and goods wagons.

 Chemicals and Explosives

 Chemische Düngerfabrik   Rendsburg (3)

   The Chemische Dungerfabrik Rendsburg A.G'
   have large superphosphate works at
   Rendsburg. Their production of sulphuric
   acid (100 per cent) is given as 1,590 tons
   per annum. In 1928 their annual output
   capacity was given as 10,000 to 20,000 tons
   of 100 per cent acid

- 575 -

REPELN-BAERL (Rhineland)
51° 30' N. 6° 40' E:  295 miles: (15,000)

 Repelen-Baerl is cn the left bank of the Rhine 4 miles North
of Homberg' Its activities are chiefly connected with coal mining.
The coal mine a concerned are described under Kamp—Lintfort and
Homberg respectively.
 

REUTLINGEN (Württemberg)
48° 30' N. 9° 10' E:  465 miles: (38,000)

 Reutlingen, which is 20 miles South of Stuttgart, has a large
textile industry mainly in the hands of medium sized firms. Cotton
spinning and weaving and hosiery manufacture are each represented
by several such factories, and various textile fancy goods are also
produced. There is a technical training college and research
institute devoted to the textile industry.

 Reutlingen has also several engineering firms but none is
individually of great importance.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Ernst Wagner      Reutlingen (3)
   The. Ernst Wagner Apparatebau are makers of
   trucks and transporters for use in factories,
   and of metal containers, chiefly for chemical
   and dye works.

 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

 Gminden       Reutlingen (-)

   The Ulrich Gminden G. m.b.H. are cotton
   spinners and weavers. They are cue of the largest
   of the textile mills in Reutlingen, and are
   mentioned as an example of a large number of
   similar undertakings in this town.
 

RHEINE (Westphalia)
52° 17' N. 7° 27' E: 330 miles: (35,000)

 Rheine is situated to the extreme North of Westphalia, cn the
river Ems. It is an inportant centre for both rail and water
transport. The Dortmund-Ems canal passes 3 miles North-east of
the town and the Mittelland canal joins the Dortmund-Ems canal 8
 miles to the East of the town at Bevergern. Two main railway lines
cross at Rheine; the line from Hamm and the Ruhr Northwards to Emden
and the line from Holland in the West to Osnabrück, Hanover and
central Germany in the East.

- 576 -

  In peace, time, Rheine was a centre for the textile industry.
To-day, although there are no industries of individual importance,
there are firms engaged in metal manufacture, some spinning and
weaving of textiles, and a certain amount of repairs to rolling-
stock is undertaken.

  The population of Rheine has doubled itself since 1925. This
is probably due to its excellent transport facilities together with
its peace time industrial development.

 Transportation

  Marshalling Yards      Rheine (3)

   The Rheine marshalling yards are capable of,
   handling 2,000 wagons per 24 hours.

  Railway Repair Shops     Rheine (3)

   There are medium sized repair shops under-
   taking mainly the repair of goods wagons.

 Engineering and Armaments

  Windhaff       Hovestr.  (3)

   The Rheiner Maschinenfabrik Windhoff A.G.
   formerly manufactured various types of
   railway equipment including turntables and
   shunting locomotives. Underground Diesel
   locomotives are also produced. It is
   reported that they are now producing locomotives
   and components for the Henschel factory at
   Kassel and that their works have been
   considerably enlarged.
 
RHEINFELDEN (Baden)
47° 35' N. 7° 50' E: 445 miles: (7,000)

  Rheinfelden is on the upper Rhine and close to the Swiss frontier
6 miles East of Basle. The activities are concerned chiefly with
the large aluminium works and the chemical factory.

 Public Utility Services

  Electric Power Station    Rheinfelden (2)
   This is the oldest of the power stations of the
   Upper Rhine Hydro Scheme (see under Waldshut)
   which consists of 8 existing and 5 projected
   hydro-electric power stations on the river Rhine,
   jointly developed by Germany and Switzerland.
   It has an estimated installed capacity of 65 MW.
   A weir stands across the Rhine, two miles below
   the Ryburg Schwörstadt power station, and the
   Rheinfelden station is situated 1,000 yards
   below the weir, approximately 10 miles East and

- 577 -

   upstream from Basle. The station was in
   process of reconstruction and development
   at the outbreak of war. There is a large
   substation which contains at least fifteen
   50'kV and ten 60 kV switches.
   Local supply is given to the Rheinfelden
   works of the Aluminium Industrie A.G-. and
   to the I.G-. Farben works.
   One 110 kV line connects to Ryburg-Schwbrstadt
   and there is a projected 110 kV line to
   Eichstetten. A connection at lower voltage
   passes to Augst-Wyhlen.


   Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication


A. I. A G' Rheinfelden (2)

    The works of the Aluminium Industrie A.G.
    occupy a large area along the northern bank
    of the Rhine which here forms the frontier
    between Germany and Switzerland. They
    have been considerably extended during the
    war and are now estimated to have a capacity
    of 30,000 tons of aluminium. Some 3,000
    workers are employed, including a proportion
    of foreign labour. Power is taken from the
    Rheinfelden power station (see under .
    P. U. S. ).


 Chemicals and Explosives


I. G-. Farben Rheinfelden (3)

   These chemical works^which are adjacent to
   the aluminium plant mentioned above^have a
   capacity of 25,000 tons of caustic soda
   and 22,200 tons of chlorine per annum. This
   plant has an estimated annual capacity of
   5,000 tons of synthetic rubber. The
   acetylene process is used.

- 578 -


RHEYDT (Rhineland)
51° 10' N. 6° 30' E:   285 miles: (80,000)

  Rheydt is to the South of München-Gladbach, which town it
almost adjoins. It is the railway junction of importance to the Lower
Rhineland, and there are large marshalling yards.

  The most important single undertaking in Rheydt is the Kabelwerke
Rheydt A. G. and there are several other engineering works and makers
of textile machinery. In peacetime Rheydt is, together with Munchen-
Gladbach, an important textile centre and has a large number of spinning
and weaving mills making cotton, woollen and silk products, but it is
believed that a large part of this trade was transferred early in the
war to the textile districts of Saxony and Eastern Germany.

 Transportation

  Railway Junction     Rheydt   (3)
   Two important railway lines, coming from Aachen
   to the South-west and from Köln to the South-east
   respectively, meet in Rheydt before entering
   ifunchen-Gladbach (2 miles to the North) where they
   connect with the main route from the Ruhr to
   Venlo and Holland.

  Marshalling Yards     Rheydt   (3)
   The Rheydt marshalling yards are capable of
   handling 2500 wagons per 24 hours.

 Public Utility Services

  Gasworks       Rheydt   (3)
   In 1936 the municipal gasworks made 250 million cu. ft.
   of gas.

 Engineering and Armaments

  Kab elwerk      Bonnenb ro ichers t r. (2)
   The Kabelwerk Rheydt A.G. are large cable works
   equipped for the manufacture of all kinds of cables,
   including insulated cables for high- and low-
   tension. Some 3500 workers are believed to be
   employed. This company, which acquired the bulk
   of the shares of the Deutsche Kabelwerke A. G., controls,
   in addition to the parent factory in Rheydt, large
   works in Berlin-Lichtenberg (where they adjoin the
   Ariadne works) and in Ketschendorf near lürstenwalde.
   They are among the leading suppliers of cables in
   Germany.

  Schorch Werke A.G.      Ludwig Knickmann Str. (3)
   The Schorch Werke A.G. are makers of electric
   generators, motors, and transformers, including
   those of the largest size. They employed some
   1500 workers before the war.

- 579 -

   Froriep G.nub.H. Egers tr. (3)
    The Ifeschinenfabrik Froriep G.m.b.H. are makers
    of lathes, boring and planing machines, and other
    machine tools.

Scheidt & Bachmann Rheydt   (3)
  The Scheidt & Bachmann A. G. are makers of railway
  signalling apparatus and point installations.
  The products also include oil tank installations.
  Approximately 1,000 workers were employed before
  the war.


RIESA (Saxony)
51° 20' N. 13° 20' E:   580 miles:  (27,000)

  Riesa is 28 miles North-west of Dresden and on the left
bank of the Elbe.  The main line from Leipzig to Dresden here
cresses the Elbe.  Riesa is a transhipment centre of some importance
to the waterborne traffic on the Elbe. The steelworks form the
chief industry of the town. There are a number of flour mills,
but the remaining industries, which include a vegetable-oil
crushing plant, are on a small scale.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Stahlwerke      Riesa   (2)
 Stahlwerke      Groditz  3)
  The Mitteldeutsche Stahlwerke A.G., parent
  works of which are at Riesa, is a large concern
  which employed in total some 15,000 workers
  before the war. In addition to the two works
  at Riesa and Groditz, they have brown-coal mines,
  a large electric power station, and an iron foundry
  at Lauchhammer, which is dealt with separately
  under the heading Senftenberg. The Riesa works
  have seven Siemens-Martin furnaces (with capacity
  for 60,000 tons per annum), stamping, pressing and
  rolling mills, and steel tube-making plant. Among
  other products they make catalyst ovens and ether
  equipment for synthetic-oil plants.
  The Gröditz works are 10 miles North-east of Riesa
  on a branch railway to Elsterwerda. This plant
  includes four Siemens Martin furnaces, rolling and
  stamping mills, and an iron and steel foundry.
  The products include steel plates for shipbui1di ng,
  and railway-wagon components and wheels.

 Foodstuffs

 A. Hübner & Co. A.G. .    Riesa   (-)

 Gebr. Sch&nherr     Riesa   -)

  The above are the two largest of seven flour mills
  in Riesa. Each of these two mills has a capacity
  for 150'tons daily and large grain-storage
  facilities.

- 580 -


RONNEBURG (Thuringia)
50° 50' N. 12° 5' E: 535 miles: (8,000)

 Ronneburg is 5 miles East of Gera on a branch railway-
leading from Gera to Meerane. There are curative springs in this
neighbourhood and Ronneburg is a small health resort. Apart from
an engineering works, the industry includes a number of small
textile mills.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Max Hering      Ronneburg  (2)

   The Auto-Räder £ Felgenfabrik Max Hering A.G. employed
   approximately 1,000 workers before the war and are
   important makers of motor-car wheels of both the
   wire and disc types. In peacetime they were the
   chief suppliers of wheels to Opels. Their works,
   which include iron and steel foundries, were
   enlarged in 1936.


- 581 -


ROSENHEIM (Bavaria)
47° 50' N. 12° 10' E: 600 miles: (20,500)

 Rosenheimis at the foot of the Bavarian Alps, 35 miles South-
east of Munich and on the River Inn. Since the earliest times it
has been a trading centre of note owing to its position on one of
the historic routes from Italy via the Brenner Pass and the Inn
valley into Central Europe,. It is now a railway junction of great
importance. The industries of Rosenheim are normally on a small
scale, but the rubber boat and clothing factory of Klepper G.m.b.H.
has assumed new importance since the war. There are large brine
deposits in this region which are an important source of the German
salt supply.

 Transportation

 Railway Junction     Rosenheim   (2)
   Rosenheimis on the main line from
   Munich via the Inn valley to Innsbruck
   and the Brenner Pass. A second line
   diverges at Rosenheim and leads to
   Salzburg and Vienna. Both of these are
   highly important trunk routes. A further
   branch line connects Rosenheim with
   Munich by a route to the South of the
   main track, and a branch line also leads
   Northwards down the Inn valley to connect
   with the Munich-Braunau route to Austria.

Chemicals and Explosives

 Bayerische A.G.     Heufeld    (3)
   At Kirchdorf-Heufeld 7 miles West of
   Rosenheim on a branch line leading to
   Holzkirchen, the Bayerische A.G. für
   chemische & landwirtschaftlich-
   chemische Fabrikate have a chemical
   works making chiefly sulphuric acid,
   for which they have an annual capacity
   of 27,000 tons.

Rubber and Tyres

 Klepper Werke      Rosenheim   (2)
   The Klepper Werke G,m.b.H. are
   important producers of rubber boats
   and early in 1942 obtained of a
   large batch of Government orders. The
   range of products includes boats for
   troop transports (including types
   which can be fitted with outboard
   motors), and boats specially designed
   for work in heavy surf. They were
   believed to be employing about 4,000
   workers in 1943' Klepper also makes
   oilskins and waterproof clothing
   generally and undoubtedly has its own
   plant for rubber proofing. They are
   also believed to be the chief supplier
   of waterproof (rubber) clothing for
   the German armed forces.

- 582 -

  Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

 Zellstoffwerke     Redenfelden  (-)

  The Aschaffenburger Zellstoffwerke
  A.G. have a large mill at Redenfelden
  on the River Inn 2 miles South of
  Rosenheim. Cellulose for paper
  making is the chief product and the
  plant also includes a mill where
  finished paper is manufactured.
 
ROSSWEIN (Saxony)
51° 5' N. 13° 10' E:  575 miles: (10,000)

 Rosswein which is 25 miles west of Dresden, is an industrial
town on the Freiberger Mulde, a tributary of the River Mulde. It
is on a branch railway which leads from Meissen and joins the
Riesa-Chennitz line at Dbbeln, 5 miles North-west of Rosswein. The
town's industries include textiles, carpet making and several small-
scale engineering works as well as a ferro-alloy plant which
produces tungsten powder.

Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys

 Th, Knioscha      Rosswein    (3)

  The firm of Th. Kniesche has a ferro-
  alloy plant which has an estimated
  annual capacity of 180 tons of tungsten
  powder.

 Engineering and Armaments 
 Carl Bauch     Rosswein    (3)
  The Rossweiner Metallwarenfabrik
  Carl Bauch manufactures armatures
  and couplings for gas and water pipe
  systems and printing machinery.
  Before the war some 700 workers were
  employed.
 

ROSTOCK (Mecklenburg)
54° 5' N. 12° 10' E: 545 miles: (122,000)

 Rostock is near the mouth of the River Warnow, which from
this point flows through a wide channel to enter the Baltic 6
 miles to the North at Warnemhnde. It is one of the larger German
Baltic ports and a considerable trade with Denmark and Sweden is
bandied in the harbour of Rostock itself and in Warnemünde, which
serves as an advanced port. The Neptun shipbuilding concern is an
important builder of submarines, and these yards, together with the
principal works of the Heinkel concern, make Rostock a production
centre of the highest value at the present time. These two
undertakings form the main part of Rostock's industry. Their output
has been considerably reduced by bombing attacks and by the transfer
of a large part of the Heinkel activities to Oranienburg.

- 583 -

 The town is on the left bank of the Warnow. The central area
is closely built and largely composed of buildings dating back to
the days of the Hanseatic League. This part of the town was heavily
damaged by bombing in 1942.

 The shipbuilding yards are on the Western outskirts of the
town, and three of the Heinkel plants are situated in the same Area
along the railway from Rostock to Warnenünde, which follows the
River Warnow approximately half a mile from the left bank. A fourth
Heinkel plant, is at the Eastern end of the town near to the goods
station and the gasworks. The other industries, which include
chemical plants and a number of minor engineering works, are in the
Southern and Western quarters of the town area. Rostock is the
largest town in Mecklenburg and is the seat of a University.

 Transportation

 Port Area      Rostock   (3)
   In peacetime Rostock's tirade is mainly
   with Denmark and Sweden, and an important
   railway link with Copenhagen is the
   train ferry whicb runs from Warnemünde to
   G jedsen in Denmark. The larger of the
   two chief docks of the port is at Warnemünde
   6 miles to the North of Rostock where the
   River Warnow, after widening into a large
   lagoon (Der Breitling), is connected with
   the Baltic by a narrow channel through the
   tongue of land on which Warnemünde is
   built.

 Railway Junction    Rostock   (3)
   The main line connecting Rostock with
   Berlin and Hamburg passes through the
   principal railway station on the
   Southern outskirts of the town and runs
   close to the left bank of the Wamow to
   Warnemünde. A second line diverges
   close to the main station and leads in
   an Easterly direction to Stralsund.

 Railway Repair Shops    Rostock   (3)

   These repair shops, which undertake
   mainly the repair of goods wagons,
   are immediately South-east of the main
   railway station. The goods and
   marshalling yards serving the quays
   and dock area are to the South of the
   repair shops.

  Public Utility Services

 Power Station      Rostock   (3)

   The thermal power station has an
   installed capacity of 27 MW. It is
   connected by 30 kV and 80 kV lines to
   the substation at G-Üstrow which links
   up with the 100/150'kV long-distance
   double-circuit line to Finow.

 Gasworks      Bleicherstr. 26. (3)


   In 1936, the municipal gas
   works made 382 million cubic
   feet of gas.

- 584 -


  Aircraft and Aero-Engines


 Heinkel       Marienehe (1)

   The Ernst Heinkel Flugzeugwerke are
   the parent works of the company 'nd
   have four separate branches in the
   Rostock area, of which the largest
   is the assembly plant at Marienehe
   established about 1935,3 miles to the
   North of Rostock on the road to
   Wamemhnde. ^his assembly plant
   employs at least 8,000 workers,
   including a large proportion of foreign
   workers. Marienehe was the research
   and development centre and has been
   responsible for the design of a long
   series of Heinkel types (bombers,
   seaplanes, transport types, etc.).
   The main type produced is the He.Ill
   twin-engined bomber which has been
   in production in successive versions
   since 1935' The He. 177 heavy bomber
   has been built in small numbers since
   1941 but large-scale assembly has been
   transferred elsewhere (Oranienburg and
   Arado, Brandenburg). Marienehe still
   produces the twin - He.Ill five -
   engined glider-towing aircraft.

   The works are on a large scale with
   five assembly halls and over 20 separate
   machine shops. They have been
   continually expanded during the past few
   years. Large-scale production of
   Heinkel types was also from 1937 under-
   taken at the Oranienburg subsidiary
   (He.Ill's) near Berlin and in 1942-43 at
   the Schwechat plant near Vienna (He.219
   twin-engined dive-bomber and recently
   He.280 Jet-propelled fighter). Aₛ a
   result of the April 1942 raid on Rostock
   the research sections, together with
   their equipment and the wind tunnel, were
   moved to Schwechat.

 Heinkel       Bleicherstr. (2)

   The Bleicherstrasse works, which are
   in the South-eastern quarter of the city
   of Rostock employ some 9 000 workers
   and make aircraft metal components
   mainly stamped and pressed parts,
   including supports, frames and seats,
   both for the Marienehe plant and for the
   Heinkel assembly works in Oranienburg
   (near Berlin) and Vienna.

 Heinkel       Werft str. (2)

   The Werftstrasse works, which are in
   the Western quarter of the city between
   the Neptun shipbuilding yards and the
   railway line, employ 2,000 workers
   and construct fuselages and wing
   components. This branch specialises in
   woodworking.

- 585 -


   Heinkel     Horst 'ess  Str. (3)

   These works are engaged on the
   construction and fitting of the
   lighter parts of aircraft and on
   work in conjunction with the main
   assembly plant at Marienehe, one mile
   to the Northwards. The Horst Wessel
   Strasse works, which are the smallest
   of the four Rostock Heinkel plants,
   are on the Western side of the railway
   near to the Werftstrasse factory.

   Bachmann     Ribnitz    (3)

   The Bachmann Flugzeug K.G. have a
   repair works at the airfield which
   is chiefly engaged on the overhaul
   of aircraft of Heinkel design
   (bombers and reconnaissance types).

  Pütnitz - a further Heinkel branch in the
   neighbourhood, formerly producing
   cockpit, nose and other fuselage
   components. Now reported that this
   work has been transferred from Pütnitz
   to a new works at Barth.

Shipbuilding 

   Neptunwerft     Werft str.  (2)
   The Neptunwerft Rostock Schiffswerft
   und Maschinenfabrik G.m.b.H. is an
   important shipyard, who at one time
   built only merchant ships but since
   193Ö have been increasingly turned
   over to warship construction. In
   the present war they have completed
   a number of 500-ton submarines, escort
   vessels, and ÖDO-ton mine sweepers.
   In September 1943 the maximum figure
   of 9 U-boats were under construction.
   These yards can also build merchant
   vessels up to 7500 tons and in 1943
   comnenced work on orders for 3000-ton
   merchant ships under the German "Hansa"
   programs.

   The four building slips vary between
   250'and 600 ft. in length and two
   floating docks of 310 and 400 ft.
   length are also attached to the yard.

   In 1941 some 2,000 workers were
   reported to be employed, including a
   high proportion of foreign labourers,
   the majority of whom were French.
   The Neptunwerft was undertaking ship
   repairs on a large scale, this side
   of the yard's activities having been
   greatly developed. They have important
   machine shops and produce their own
   marine steam engines, boilers and
   superheaters.

- 586 -

ROTTWEIL (Württemberg)
48° 10' N. 8° 35' E: 450 miles: (12,000)

 Rottweil is 10 miles North-east of Schwenningen and on the main
line from Stuttgart to Schaffhausen and Zurich. Apart from an
explosives factory the industries, which include clock end watch
making and textiles, are not on a large scale.

 Chemicals and Explosives

 Kbln-Rottweil A.G.    Rottweil    (3)
   This factory is operated by the Kbln-
  Rottweil A.G., who are controlled by
  I.G. Farbenindustrie. This plant
  operated in the last war, producing
  about 750'tons of nitrocellulose per
  month. It continued operations under
  the terms of the Versailles Treaty,
  making a small quantity of propellant
  powder for sporting anniunition, and a
  considerable quantity of nitrocellulose
  for artificial fibre production.

   Ground reports suggest that the production
  of nitrocellulose is now somewhat larger
  than in the last war, and that some high
  explosive, believed to be T. N. T. was
  also made. Air photographs confirm the
  existence of considerable nitrocellulose
  capacity, but there is no evidence of a
  T. N. T. unit. These photographs suggest
  that the nitrocellulose capacity probably
  lies between 8,000 and 10,000 tons per
  annum.
 

RUDOLSTADT (Thuringia)
50° 40' N. 11° 20' E: 500 miles: (18,000)

 Rudolstadt is in the valley of the Saale 10 miles North of
Saalfeld and on the railway from North to South Germany via Jena
and Bamberg. The manufacture of porcelain is the main peacetime
industry, but there are also factories making Rbntgen tubing and
other therapeutic and chemical apparatus, vacuum flasks, and appliances for
food storage. N.ar Schwarza, 2 miles to the South-west, where
there is an important rayon plant, is an airfield which forms a station
on the peacetime air-traffic routes.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Siemens-Reiniger     Rudolstadt   (3)

   The Siemens-Reiniger Werke A.G., a
  subsidiary of Siemens & Halske, are
  makers of X-Ray and all kinds of
  therapeutic electrical apparatus.
  They have a second factory at
  Erlangen in Bavaria. The Rudolstadt
  factory, formerly the PhBnix
  RBntgenrbhrenfabriken A.G., specialises
  in vacuum tubes for X-Ray apparatus,
  and also makes glass laboratory equipment.

 Isola       Rudolstadt   (-)

   The Isola Ges. fbr WSrme & Khlte
  Isolierung are makers of vacuum
  flasks and insulated food-storage
  equipment.     
  
- 587 -

  Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

Zellwolle Schwarza (3)
    The Thüringische Zellwolle A.G. is
    one of the large rayon-producing
    factories, the erection of which was
    begun in 1935 as part of the Four
    Year Plan. Production began in 1936
    and at the outbreak of war the
    Schwarza factory was one of the
    largest rayon-producing units operating
    in Germany. The production capacity
    was 100 tons per day. In 1938 some
    1,200 workers were employed. Schwarza
    is 2 miles South-west of Rudolstadt.
 
RUHLA (Thuringia)
50° 55' N. 10° 25' E: 455 miles: (9,000)


  Ruhla is in the Thuringia Wald 6 miles South East of Eisenach
 and at the terminus of a small branch line which connects with the
 main Berlin-Frankfurt line at Wurtha, 3 miles to the North. It is
 a small tourist resort for visitors to the Thuringian mountains,
 but has also a considerable watch and clock making industry and
 a number of factories making small metal goods and fittings. The
 largest of these firms, which is described below, has now been
 developed into an important supplier of A.A. ammunition fuses.

Engineering and Armament


  Gebr.Thiel Ruhla (2)
    The G-ebr.^hiel G,m.b.H. incorporating
    the Thiel and Schuchardt A.G. are
    manufacturers of watches and clocks, and
    also of sawing and planing machinery.
    A section of the works is devoted to the
    making of precision tools required for
    the watch making industry. Thiel are
    the leading German time fuze producers,
    their mechanical time fuze being the
    normal design employed in German A.A.
    and other shells. They have branches
    in the neighbouring towns of Seebaoh
    and Mühlhausen and probably sub-contract
    a large proportion of the work on small
    parts for the clockwork movements to
    local firms. There are a number of
    smaller watch making firms in Ruhla
    which are also believed to be engaged
    on this work.



RUHLAND-SCHWARZHEIDE (SAXONY)


    (see under Senftenberg)

- 588 -

RUHR (RHINELAND AND WESTPHALIA)
 

General

 The valley of the river Ruhr lies between those of the rivers
Wupper and Lippe, and it extends through the provinces of Rhineland
and Westphalia.

 The industrial targets in the area are concentrated in a narrow
strip of territory which extends East from the river Rhine and is about
30 miles long and 10 miles wide; and which lies approximately between
the river Ruhr and the Rhe in-Herne canal. The Ruhr and the adjacent
areas in Rhineland and Westphalia contain a concentration of industry
which is without parallel in Europe. An almost unbroken chain of great
industrial cities runs from Duisburg in the West through Oberhausen,
Mülheim, Essen, Giesenkirchen, and Bochum to Dortmund in the East.

 Notwithstanding the policy of industrial dispersal and the heavy
air attacks, there has been no appreciable movement of heavy industry
away from the Ruhr to safer areas and, although strenuous efforts have
been made to develop new heavy industrial plants elsewhere, the Ruhr
area retains nearly all of its pre-war importance as the principal
centre of heavy industry in Germany.

Division into districts

 For trie purpose of this report the Ruhr has been divided into 14
districts, under which headings they should be sought in the text.
These conform roughly with the district boundaries as marked on the
G.S.&S. (4081 series)
maps of Germany)
a map showing these boundaries
is included in volume one. West to East these districts are;-

     Duisburg
     Oberhausen
     Millheim
     Bottrop
     Gladbeck
     Essen
     Gelsenkirchen
     Wanne-Eickel
     Wattenscheid
     Herne
     Bochum
     Castrop-Rauxel
     Witten
     Dortmund.

 Localities bordering on the Ruhr area are described under their own
heading with the following exceptions; -

 Herten and Oer-Erkenschwick are described under the heading
'Recklinghausen"; Httls under "Marl"; Haspe, Gevelsberg and Schwelm are
under'Hagen”; Barmen and Elberfeld under "Wuppertal”; and Hohenlimburg
under "Letmarthe”.


- 589 -




RUMMENOHL (Westphalia)
51° 15' N. 7° 30' E: 325 miles: (600)

 Rummenohl is 7 miles South of Hagen on a branch railway line
which follows the valley of the River Volme, a tributary of the
Ruhr, to Brügge in the hilly district of the Sauerland. Rummenohl
is of no importance apart fromits explosives works.

  Chemical wd Explosives

 Dynamit A.G.     Rumnenohl (3)
   This factory made considerable quantities
   of cordite propellant in the last war,
   at which time it also apparently
   manufactured some nitrocellulose. There
   is no evidence of activity here in the
   peace years, but it is reported that
   work began again in 1943 It I° ⁿ°t dear
   whether explosives manufacture or filling
   is undertaken at the present time, but
   one reference to the filling of incendiary
   bombs here makes it improbable (if this
   information is correct) that explosives
   manufacture would be undertaken on the
   same site.
 

RÜSSELSHEIM (Hesse)
50° N. 8° 20' E: 385 miles: (14,000)

 Rüsselsheimis on the River Main 10 miles East of Mains. It is
the site of the chief works of the Opel concern. These works, which
in peacetime were among the largest motorcar manufacturers in Europe,
have been greatly expanded during the war, and the pre-war population
of Rüsselsheim, which is given above, will now have been much increased.
The Opel works are now largely engaged on aircraft component as well as
motor transport manufacture and the number of workers have been
reported as high as 20,000. The town of Rüsselsheimis entirely
concerned with the Opel works, and there are no other industries of
importance.

  Aircraft and Aero-Engines

 Adam Opel A.G.      Rüsselsheim   (2)
   Certain departments of the Opel car
   works were in 1939-40 turned over
   or expanded for aircraft component s
   manufacture and the present note
   relates only to that side of their
   work.

   The heavy press capacity at Rüsselsheim
   is partly devoted to the fabrication of
   Ju.88 bomber components for supply to
   the assembly plants at Bernburg and
   elsewhere. These components incl trie
   the frameworks for cockpit covers, for
   transparent nose units and for gun
   turret covers. In addition aero-engine
   bearers, cowlings and nacelles are made,
   together with undercarriages and tail
   wheels, all for the same type of aircraft.

- 590 -

 In a special department airscrew
 reduction gears for fitting to
 Daimler-Benz aero-engines are
 made and supplied to the DE:
 aero-engine factories. The
 Rüsselsheim works is also believed
 to be an important producer of
 tools, Jigs and dies required in
 other aircraft factories in Germany.

 Only a proportion (possibly 3,000)
 öf the total employed at Rüsselsheim
 are concerned with the above aircraft
 components work.

  Engineering and Armaments

  Adam Opel A.G.    Rüsselsheim (1)

 These works, occupying a larga site
 West and South West of Rüsselsheim,
 with a quay frontage on the South
 bank of the Main, at one time
 produced the Opel range of cars and
 lorries. They were owned by General
 Motors. Their pre-war output was up
 to 120,000 units annually, the works
 having a productive capacity at,the
 rate of 200,000 units per annum.
 In 1935, lorry production was transferred
 to a new plant at Brandenburg, many
 of the components continuing to be made
 at Rüsselsheim, however. At the outbreak
 of war car production was stopped and a
 portion of the plant was converted to the
 manufacture of air-frame components for
 Junkers 88 aircraft. Aircraft propellor
 reduction gearing for Daimler-Benz
 aircraft engines was also manufactured.
 In addition, large quantities of vehicle
 spare parts continued to be made,
 Rüsselsheim being responsible for
 maintaining the Opel service and repairs
 organisation, whilst parts were sent to
 the loriy producing plant at Brandenburg.
 It was reported early in 1943 that
 Rüsselsheim was to concentrate upon
 lorry production, and several reports
 concerning the manufacture of lorries
 at this plant have been received. On the
 other hand, several references to the
 manufacture of aircraft engines have been
 received in 1943 In addition, reference
 has been made to the manufacture of
 armoured cars, tracked motor cycles, and
 amphitfous vehicles.

 The number of workers has been variously
 reported and the whole Rüsselsheim complex
 would appear to employ 20,000 to 25,⁰⁰⁰
 workers including a large number of
 foreigners.

- 591 -

SAALFELD (Thuringia)
50° 40' N. 11° 20' E: 500 miles: (20,000)

 Saalfeld is on the left bank of the River Saale and on one of
the min North to South railway routes through the Thuringian hills.
A paper mill and a number of small iron foundries and engineering
works constitute the main industries of Saalfeld itself. Large iron
and steel works are situated 3 mi les East of the town and it is also
the headquarters of an important hydro-electric scheme in the valley
of the Saale.

 Transportation

 Railway Junction      Saalfeld    (3)

   The railway line from Halle, which follows
   the valley of the Saale to Saalfeld and
   leads thenoe southwards through the
   Thüringer Wald to Bamberg and Nürnberg,
   forms one of the chief North to South
   railway routes. This line is Joined at
   Saalfeld by a branch line from Gera, and
   a subsidiary branch line connects Saalfeld
   with Arnstadt to the North West.

 Public Utility Services

 Hydro Scheme      Saale   (2)
   With the primary object of improving the
   navigation of the river Elbe in dry
   periods and of preventing flood damage,
   two large dams have been erected at
   Bleiloch and Hohenwarte to control the
   inflow of the Saale, a tributary of the
   Elbe. These dams and their reservoirs,
   which impound a water volume almost equal
   to the annual flow of the Saale, are
   among the largest in Germany. The water
   power thus created is used to serve an
   important hydro scheme. The four
   generating stations described below are
   now fully developed, and it is probable
   that plans exist for further constructions
   which will greatly increase the output.
  -N.ar Saalburg, 20 miles South-east of
   Saalfeld, is the Bleilooh dam and
   reservoir and its adjacent Burgkhanrner
   compensating reservoir. The generating
   stations of these two have capacities of
   40 UW and 5 respectively. A pump-
   storage station operates between the two
   reservoirs. Pour miles South-east of
   Saalfeld, near the village of Kaulsdorf,
   is the Hohenwarte dam and reservoir and
   its adjacent Eichicht compensating
   reservoir. The generating stations of
   these two have capacities of 50'and 5
   W respectively. A pump-storage station
   operates between the two reservoir's.

- 592 -

 It la planned to construct a further
 pump-storage station of 368 MW capacity
 using the Eichicht compensating
 reservoir as a lower reservoir and a
 high level reservoir in the hills on
 the left bank of the River Saale.

 An indoor substation, owned by the
 Thhringenwerke A.G., Weimar, is situated
 270 feet above the Bleiloch generating
 station, and contains two 10/50/100 kV
 transformers of 20 W. capacity.

 100 kV lines go to Herlasgrtm and
 Hof.

 A 50'kV double-circuit line goes to
 Jena.

 Local supplies are given at 10 kV and
 the stations of the group are inter-
 connected at this voltage.

 The planned 220 kY long-distance line
 linking the power stations of the Alps
 with central and eastern Industrial
 Germany will pass through Bleiloch via
 Gebersdorf.

 Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys

  Maximilianhhtte     Unterwellenborn (3)
 The Eisenwerk Gesellschaft
 Maximilianh&tte, which is owned by
 the Flick group, has a large iron and
 steel works situated between the
 villages of Unterwellenborn and Rbblits
 3 miles to the East of Saalfeld. This
 works comprises blast furnaces and steel
 rolling mills. The capacity is estimated
 to be 250,000 tons of pig iron and 250,000
 tons of crude steel per annum. Some 3000
 workers are believed to be employed. This
 works utilise the ore from the mines near
 the village of Gross Kamsdorf, 2 miles South
 of Unterwellenborn.

 Engineering and Armaments

  Adolf Knooh     Saalfeld  (-)

 The NShmaschinenfabrik Adolf Knoch A.G.
 were manufacturers of sewing machines,
 and employed some 300 workers before the
 war.

  Reissmann      Kaiserstr.   (-)

 The August Reissmann Maschinenfabrik
 K.G. were makers of machinery for the
 ceramic industry. Some 30O workers
 were employed before the war.

- 593 -

Paul Auerbach    Saalfeld i (-)
Franz Irmischer     Saalfeld -)
These are two of several small iron
foundries and engineering works in
Saalfeld.

 Foodstuffs
Mauxion     Saalfeld (-)

  In peacetime the Schokoladenfabrik
  Mauxion nub.H. is one of the four
  largest chocolate and sweet manu-
  facturing concerns in Germany

SAARBRÜCKEN (Saar)
49° 15' N. 7° E: 350 miles: (130,000)

  Saarbrücken is the largest town in the Saar territory and a
  most important industrial and coal-mining centre It is near the
  southern boundary of the Saar area and is on a main railway line
  which follows the valley of the River Saar to Trier. Saarbrücken
  is a railway Junction for several branch lines serving the industrial
  regions of the Saar and of Lorraine.

  The coalfields of the Saar Basin, which extend mainly to the
  North of the town, are among the largest in Europe and, together with
  the rich iron-ore deposits of Lorraine, they yield raw material for
  the highly-developed iron and steel industry in these regions. Several
  iron and steel works are established in Saarbrücken itself. The
  industries include a number of engineering works which, though
  individually on a small scale, constitute in the aggregate a valuable
  factor in the German war production. The industrial area extends
  along the valley of the River Saar from the outskirts of V611 ingen
  (5 miles to the West) to Brebach and Neusohtfidt, 3 miles to the East
  of Saarbrücken The river Saar is navigable and is an important means
  of transport for the products of this region.

 Transportation

   Inland Harbour     Saarbrücken   (3)

  This small inland harbour is in the
  centre of the town and consists of one
  large ere scent-shaped dock on the right
  bank of the river Saar. Between this
  dock and the river is an area known as
  the Kohlenbahnhof with railway sidings
  and loading facilities for coal etc.
  In 1938 inward traffic amounted to 159,000
  tons and outward traffic to 333,000 tons.

- 594 -

Railway Junction Saarbrücken (2)
 A railway runs through the northern
 quarter of the town parallel with the
 river Saar. The main station is
 immediately North of the inland harbour.
 Five important lines meet in Saarbrücken:
 from Bingen to the North-west; from the
 Upper Rhineland through Kaiserslautern;
 from Strassburg through Zweibrücken to
 the South-east; from Metz to the West;
 and from Trier to the North-west of
 Saarbrücken. Two other minor branch
 lines serve the coalfields to the North
 of the town. All these lines meet
 inside the town area.

  Marshalling Yards    Saarbrücken   (2)
 The marshalling yards, of which the
 largest are to the North-east of the
 main railway station, have a capacity
 for 6,000 wagons per 24 hours.

  Railway Repair Shops    JBurbach   (3)

 These large workshops, which are on
 the North-western outskirts of the
 town near to the suburb of Bur bach,
 employ at least 1500 workers and
 undertake the repair of locomotives
 and goods wagons.

 Public Utility Services

  Power Station      Saarbrücken   (3)
 This thermal power station is thought
 to have an installed capacity of 20
 MW.; it now probably supplies the
 tom area which, until 1958/ drew most
 of its supplies from the 75 MW. power
 station at Wehrden.

  Gas works      Saarbrücken   (3)

 The municipal gasworks sold 755
 million cubic feet of gas in 1936,
 which they bought from the Halberger
 Hütte and Burbaoher Hütte coking plants.

 Solid Fuels
  Grube Dudweiler     Sulzbach   (3)
 This coal mine, together with all the
 other ooal mines in the Saar territory,
 belongs to the German Government but is
 operated by the Saar gruben A.G. on
 their behalf. No output figures for
 this mine are available but in 1937 sOⁿ
 4,900 workers were employed and it can
 therefore be assumed that production was
 appröx. 1,200,000 tons.

- 595 -

   Grube Sulzbach      Sulzbach   (3)
    The Sulzbach coal mine had five hauling shafts and
    in 1937 produced 1500,000 tons of coal with 5,600
    workers. Sulzbaoh is 9 miles to the North-east of
    Saarbrücken.

   Grube Camphausen     Fischbach  (3)
    The Camphausen coal mine has five hauling shafts
    and in 1937 employed seme 4500 workers, Fischbach
    is 8 miles to the North of Saarbrücken.

   Grube Geislautern     luisenthal (3)
    The Geislautern coal mine has three hauling shafts
    and in 1937 2,400 workers were employed.

   Grube Gottelborn     Furstenhausen (3)
    The Gottelborn ooal mine has two hauling shafts
    and in 1937 employed seme 2500 workers,
    Furst hausen is 4 miles West of Saarbrücken,

   Halberger Hutte      Brebaoh   (3)
    The Halbergerhutte G.m.b.H, coking plant has
    35 ovens with an annual rated dry ooal capacity
    of 230,000 tons. (See also under I., S. and F.-A. )

   Burbaoh-Eich-Dudelingen coking plant Saarbrücken (2)
   Owned by the Vereinigte Hüttenwerke Burbach-
   Eioh-Dudelingen A.G., and situated within the
   company's iron and steel works, this coking
   plant is believed to have 195 ovens in operation
   with an estimated annual dry coal capacity of
   747,000 tons. The plant has a total of
   8 batteries comprising 384 ovens, some of which
   are believed to be unactive. In July 1942,
   aerial cover revealed that during the
   reconstruction of one of the newer batteries
   of 60 Keppers ovens, some of the old waste-
   heat evens were in operation. It is not
   known whether these latter are still in
   operation or not.

- 596 -

 Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys

 Var.Hüttenwerke      Saarbr&oken (1)
  Th© iron and steel works of the Ver.
  Hüttenwerke Bürbach-^ ich-Pudelingen
  A.G. is the largest works of this kind
  in Saarbrücken. It has 8 blast furnaces,
  five 22-ton Thomas converters and 3
  open-hearth furnaces. The capacity is
  estimated at 700,000 tons of steel per
  annum. The coking plant adjacent to
  these works is described above under
  S. F. Products include light
  armour-plating for tanks, steel structures,
  forgings, bars, sheets, and wires. The
  works occupies a large area in the Western
  quarter of the town on the right bank of
  the river Saar.

 Haiberger Hütte      Brebach   (2)
  The iron works of the Haiberger Hütte
  G.m.b.H. is in the suburb of Brebach
  to the East of Saarbrücken. It has 6
  blast furnaces and an estimated capacity
  of 450,000 tons of pig-iron per annum.
  The coking plant adjacent to these works
  is described above under S. F.
  These works produce iron castings, including
  gas, water, and drainage pipes.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Dingier Karchar & Cie     Neusoheidt (2)
  The Saarlündisches Stahlwerk Dingier
  Karcher & Cie., G-.m.b.H. are steel
  founders and makers of railway equipment,
  wagon and locomotive wheels and
  components, gears, joists and all
  varieties of cast-steel products. They
  were reported in 1943 to be employing
  some 6,000 workers. Their factory is in
  the outlying suburb of Neuscheidt, East of
  Saarbrücken.

 Brown Boveri & Cie A.G.    Im Helmerswald-St.Johann (3)
         
  The Saar Werk Brown Boveri & Cie. A.G.,
  a branch factory of the Mannheim firm,
  is a well-equipped plant which
  specialises in electric motors and
  brakes, and is believed to employ some
  700 workers. The works is in the
  suburb of St.Johann on the eastern
  side of the town.

- 597 -

 Maschinenbau A.G.     Lebaoheystr. (3)
   The Maschinenbau A.G. vorm. Ehrhardt &
   Sehmer are iron founders and makers of
   steam engines, small Diesel motors,
   compressors, pumps, and blast-furnace
   equipment. They employed some l,5°0
   workers in' 1939. Their works are in the
   North-western quarter of the town.

 Lftttgens       Brüderstr. (3)
   The works of the Lttttgens Waggonfabrik
   G.m.b.H. are in the Western suburb of
   Burbaoh adjacent to the Ver. Hüttenwerke.
   They are makers of railway wagons and wagon
   components.

 Ernst Heckel      graf Johann Str. (3)         


   The Gesellschaft fftr Förderanlagen Ernst
   Heckel m.b.H. are makers of conveyors
   and transporters, including overhead cable
   railways. Their works, which cover a
   large area, are believed to employ over
   1,000 workers.



SAARLAUTERN (Saar)
49° 20' N. 6° 45' E: 340 miles:  (33,000)


 Saarlautem (or Saarlouis)
is on the river Saar to the North-west
of and 15 miles downstream from Saarbrücken. It is less industrialised
than other Saar towns of equal size but is the seat of a large part of
the administration of the province. There are several small
engineering works and metalware manufacturers, but none of outstanding
importance The coal mine mentioned below is the most westerly of the
group of mines, the majority of which have been included under the
heading "Saarbrücken".

  Solid Fuels

 Grube Ensdorf-Viktoria    Ensdorf   (3)
   The Ensdorf coal mine, which together with
   the other mines in the Saar territory belongs
   to the German Government but is operated by
   the Saargruben A.G., is situated two miles
   to the East of Saarlautem. It has four
   hauling shafts and employed some 6,000 workers
   in 1937. Annual coal production is believed to
   be in excess of 1 million tons

- 598 -

SAGAN (Silesia)
51° 40' N. 15° 10' E:  665 miles: (20,000)

  Sagan is in Lower Silesia close to the border between the
provinces of Brandenburg and Silesia. It is the junction for two
main lines leading from northern Germany to Breslau and Upper
Silesia. Industry consists mainly of textiles and paper-making,
which in peacetime is not on a large scale; there have been
reports however, of the establishment in Sagan of a new aircraft
factory.

 Transportation

  Railway Junction     Sagan   (3)
  Two main railway lines, coming from Cottbus
  to the West, and from Frankfurt/Oder to the
  North-west, meet in Sagan and lead thence to
  Breslau and Upper Silesia.

  Railway Repair Shops     Sagan   (3)
  These are medium-sized repair shops which
  undertake mainly the repair of goods wagons.

  Aircraft and Aero-Engines

  Focke Wulf      Sagan   (-)

  A number of reports received during 1943
  suggest that one of the components
  departments of the Focke-Wulf concern
  which formerly had its parent works at
  Bremen has been transferred to Sagan.

  Reconnaissance photographs show two
  possible factories in the Sagan area
  but it is not possible to ascertain
  their activities.

- 599 -

SALZGITTER (Hanover)
52° O5' N. 10° 32' E:  miles: (4,200)

 The great iron ore deposits of Salzgitter just north of Goslar in
the Harz region and S.S.W. of Brunswick have been worked on a small
scale for many years, and, following the loss of Lorraine in 1919,
their large scale operation was discussed by German geologists and
metallurgists. According to a report published in 1934 by the Prussian
Geological Institute (Die Eisenerzvorrate des Deutschen Reiches)
the
size of the deposits of ore that could be worked as an economic
proposition was 35 million tons while there was a further 65 million
tons of ore that would require more favourable business conditions such
as cheap fireight and higher steel prices before it could be considered.

 These two categories of ore were at a depth of a few feet to nearly
1,000 feet below the surface, but going to a depth of 3,300 feet at
least MX)
million tons of ore were available. It has since been stated
that the estimate of volume of ore was much too low. Features common
to all the Salzgitter ores are their high phosphorus content, which
makes them suitable for the basic Bessemer process, and their high silica
content, which,, until the discovery by Brassert of .the means of using
acid burdens in blast furnaces, rendered them unsuitable for smelting
without the mixture of other ores. The greater part of the Salzgitter
ores have an extremely low iron content but among the best grades are
some with an iron content of about 40 per cent. Before the introduction
of the Brassert process and the erection of the Reichswerke Hermann
Gering, the best Salzgitter ores were mined to the extent of ä few
hundred thousand tons per annum by the nearby Ilseder Hütte of Peine,
which mixed them with the limey Peine ores, and by certain Ruhr works
which mixed them with imported ores.

 Following the successful introduction in the mid-thirties of acid
burdening at Corby in Northamptonshire where the ores are also sicilious,
the large scale working of Salzgitter ores became a practical proposition
provided a works was erected on the spot. In pursuance of its policy
of aiming at raw material self-sufficiency the Nazi Government
therefore decided to build such a plant and to link it by a special
canal with the Mittelland Canal so as to provide cheap transport to and
from the Ruhr. In the barges bringing the necessary coking coal for
the works' own coke ovens it was planned to send back Salzgitter ore
to the Ruhr works. Thus, as a result of Government action, conditions
were created for the use of Salzgitter ores to an extent far exceeding
anything conceived by the Prussian Geological substitute.

 There are now a number of iron ore mines in operation in this area.
As already indicated some are of the surface or quarry type and none
represent suitable'objectives”

- 600 - 

SALZWEDEL (province Saxony)
52° 50' N. 11° 10' E:   490 miles: (17,000)

  Salzwedel is in the North of the Prussian, province of Saxony
and is on a railway line leading from Berlin via Stendal to Bremen.
It is a junction for five minor branch lines serving the surrounding
district. Apart from the railway repair shops and the sugar refinery
mentioned below, there are no industries of importance. Salzwedel is
the market centre for a large agricultural area.

 Transportation

Railway Repair Shops    Salzwedel (3)
These are medium-sized repair shops
undertaking mainly the repair of goods
wagons.

Foodstuffs
Zuckerfabrik      Salzwedel (-)
The Zuckerfabrik Salzwedel A.G. is a
sugar refinery which employed some 500
workers in 1938 when its average daily
consumption of sugar beet during the
season was 60,000 quintals.

SANGERHAUSEN (province Saxony)
51° 30' N. 11° 20' E: 500 miles: (13,000)


  Sangerhausen is 30 miles West of Halle on the main line leading
from Halle and Leipzig via Kassel to the Ruhr. It has a number of
iron foundries, one of which is mentioned below, and two cycle
factories. The other activities of this town are mainly concerned
with agriculture.

  Engineering and Armaments

 Maschinenfabrik      Sangerhausen (3)

  The Maschinenfabrik Sangerhausen A.G,
   are makers of installations for sugar
   refineries, containers and apparatus for
   the chemical industry, steam engines, and
   pumps. They employed some 900 workers
   before the war.

 Mifa        Sangerhausen (3)

  The Sangerhausen works of the Mitteldeutsche
   Fahrradwerke G.m.b.H. normally manufacture
   bicycles. They are now reported to be
   making minor aircraft components,and to
   be employing some 700 workers, including a
   proportion of P s/W,

- 601 -

ST.INGBERT (Saar)
49° 15' N. 7° 5' E:  355 miles: (23,000)

  St. Ingbert is 8 miles North-east of Saarbrücken on the
railway line to Homburg, The town is on the Eastern outskirts
of the large coalfield which extends Northwards from Saarbrücken.
The principal mines of this area are dealt with under the heading
Saarbrücken. Apart from the explosives works and the steel
rolling plant the industries of St. Ingbert are not on a large
scale. They include glassmaking,leather, cotton spinning, and
hosiery manufacture.

  Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys

  H.A.D.J.R.      St. Ingbert (3)
  The St. Ingbert works of the Hochofen
  & Stahlwerke A. G, Differdingen-St.
  Ingbert-RÜmelingen include steel
  rolling mills and produce bars, sheet
  metal, rails, and wire.

 Chemicals and Explosives

  Pulverfabriken      St.Ingbert (3)
  The Pfälzische Pulverfabriken St.
  Ingbert G.m.b.H, is mainly owned
  by the Dynamit A.G' vorm. Alfred
  Nobel & Co. , and produce nitro-
  cellulose and various other
  explosives and chemicals. This
  works was formerly the chemical
  factory of the firm Gebr, Martin.

- 602 -


ST.WENDEL (Saar)
49° 50' N. 7° 10' E:   345 miles: (9,000)

  St. Wendel is 10 miles North of Neunkirchen in the Northeastern
corner of the Saar territory. Apart from the railway workshops
mentioned below, the industries, which include brick and tile
manufacture, are not of great importance.

 Transportation

  Railway Repair Shops     St.Wendel (3)
  These are medium-si zed workshops employing
   some 600 workers and undertaking mainly the
   repair of goods wagons.



SCHKEUDITZ (province Saxony)
51° 25' N. 12° 10' E:  530 miles: (14500)

  Schkeuditz is midway on the railway line connecting Halle with
Leipzig, be.mg 9 miles distant from either city. There is an
airport which in peacetime served for the Halle and Leipzig traffic.
There are a number of engineering firms, one of which is mentioned
below, and an important branch factory of the Siebel aircraft works
in Halle has now been established in Schkeuditz. In peacetime the
preparation of fur clothing formed one of the town's main industries.

  Aircraft and Aero-Engines

  Siebel        Schkeuditz (1)
  This is a branch works of the Siebel Flugzeug-
   werke Halle K.G. of Halle. The Schkeuditz
   plant is mainly engaged on the assembly of
   Ju-88's and imports components from the
   parent works at Halle and from Leipzig, The
   factory site includes a large aircraft-repair
   depot where work on Ju. , F.W. , He, , and Si, types
   is undertaken. More than 2,000 workers are
   believed to be employed at Schkeuditz.

 Engineering and Armaments

  C. Emke & Co.       Schkeuditz (3)
  The Carl Emke & Co, Spezialfabrik für Pumpen
   & Gebläsemaschinen manufacture all kinds of
   pumps (including deep wellpumps), rotary fans,
   and ventilating apparatus.

 

SCHKOPAU (Province Saxony)
51° 20' N. 12° E:  520 miles: (2,000)

  The village of Schkopau is on the left bank of the River Saale
8 miles South of Halle and is 3 miles North of Merseburg and the
large synthetic-oil plant at Leuna. Schkopau is the site of the
highly important synthetic rubber plant which is described below.
The population given above is the pre-war figure and does not
include the workers' colonies which have now been erected.

- 603 -

 Public Utility Services


  Electric Power Station     Schkopau (1)
  The electric power plant which supplies
  current to the synthetic-rubber works at
  Schkopau consists of two generating stations
  with a combined capacity of 150 mW. The
  station is owned by the Buna Werke G.m.b. H.
  The second generating station was still under
  construction in 194-2 but is assumed to be now
  complete. It is probable that most if not all
  of their combined electrical output is
  supplied to the rubber plant, the demand of
  which is probably a minimum of 125 MW with an
  annual requirement of about 900 million kWh, Steam
  is probably also supplied to the works, A
  substation connects the plant to the‘grid at
  an operating voltage of probably 110 kV, It
  is probable that one line connects to Gross
  Kayna and one to Leuna,


 Rubber and Tyres

  Buna Werke Schkopau (1+)

  The Schkopau plant of the Buna Werke G.m.b,H,
  is the largest of the German synthetic rubber
  plants, The original experimental works were
  begun in 1956, and the present factory first
  went into production in 1939 with a planned
  fin^l 'capacity of 25,000 tons per annum.
  Further expansions of the works during the war
  have increased this capacity to at least 50,000
  tons per annum. This exceeds the present
  estimated. capacity of the Hhls works, the
  second of the two leading German synthetic
  rubber plants, which is described under the
  heading Marl. The Schkopau plant produces'
  the synthetic rubber from carbide, whereas
  the Hhls plant operates from methane-ethane
  gas. At least 20,000 workers are believed to
  be employed at the Schkopau factory. There
  are workers¹ colonies both at Schkopau and in
  the neighbouring settlement of Merseburg, and
  a large proportion of the labour travels daily
  from Halle,





SCHLEBUSCH (Rhineland)
See under Leverkusen,

SCHLUCHSEE (Baden)
See under Waldshut.
 
- 604 -

SCHLESWIG (Schleswig Holstein)
54° 30' N. 9° 35' E: 455 miles:   (22,000)

 Schleswig is 20 miles South of Flensburg on the main line from
Hamburg through Flensburg into Denmark. It lies at the inner end of
the Schlei, a narrow fjord, the mouth of which is at Kappeln on the
Baltic 18 miles to the North East. There are various minor industries,
including leather working, dairy produce, roof-felt and furniture
making, but the main activities are connected with agriculture.

SCHnEIDEMÜHL (Pomerania)
53° 10' N. 16° 45' E: 720 miles:  (42,000)

 Schneidem&hl is on the Eastern border of Pomerania close to the
former Polish Corridor. It is an important railway junction on the
main route from Berlin to the East. It is a garrison town.
Schneidem&hl s main activities are connected mainly with agriculture,
and there are several engineering works which manufactured agricultural
machinery. During the war n aircraft factory has been established in
Schneidemßhl which is believed to have taken over some of the former
production of Focke Wulf of Bremen.

 Transportation

 Railway Junction     Schneidemfthl (2)
  The trunk line from Berlin and Northern
  Germany to the East divides at Schneidemhhl
  (before entering the former Polish Corridor)
  into two main branches, one leading to
  Danzig, Konigsberg and the Northern sectors
  of the Eastern Front; the second through
  Thorn to Warsaw. Both of these are important
  railway arteries. A branch line leads
  Northwards from SchneidenJuhl via Neuste-ttin
  to Belgard, and another Southwards to Posen.
  Two further minor branch lines serve the
  districts to the North-west and South-west.

 Marshalling Yards      Sohneidemthl (3)

  These marshalling yards are capable of
  handling up to 2,200 wagons per 24 hours.

 Railway Repair Shops     Schneidem&hl (3)
  These are medium sized workshops
  undertaking chiefly the repair of goods
  wagons.

- 605 -


SCHÖNEBECK (Province Saxony)
52° N. 11° 45' E: 510 miles: (36,000)

 Schönebeck is on the left bank of the Elbe 9 miles South of
Magdeburg. South of and adjoining Schönebeck is the settlement of
Bad Salzelmen where there are extensive installations for curative
brine baths. Bad Salzelmen is included in the administrative area
of Schönebeck.

 A chemical industry had developed in this town, which owed its
origin to the brine deposits in the neighbourhood; this industry is
now making explosives. There is also a large ammunition factory and
an aero-engine and aircraft components works of the Junkers concern.

 Aircraft and Aero-Engines

 Junkers Flugzeug & Motorenwerke    Schönebeck (2)
   The Junkers works at Schönebeck occupy
   a large area to the East of the town and
   are believed to be still in process of
   expansion. In January 1944 a number of
   now buildings were being erected. The
   plant is engaged on the manufacture and
   erection of control columns and engine-
   bearings, under-carriages and other
   aircraft and aero-engine components. Its
   products are supplied mainly to the Junkers
   works at Bernburg.

  Engineering and Armaments

 Patronen Zündhütchen      Bad Salzelmen (2)
   The Patronen Zündhütchen & Metallwarenfabrik
   A.G., are makers of cartridges, percussion
   caps, detonators, and S.A.A. They have
   also a section which makes machines and
   machine tools for their own works. The
   factory, in -which at least 2,000 workers
   are employed occupies a large area to the
   West of Bad Salzelmen. This company is
   jointly owned by the Dynamit A.G-. and
   Rheinmetall Borsig.

 Chemicals and Explosives

 Lignose        Bad Salzelmen (2)
   This factory is operated by the Lignose
   Sprengstoff G.m.b.H. Ground reports have
   suggested that the output of T. N. T. at
   this plant is very large indeed. Some
   reports put it as high as 60,000 tons
   per annum. Examination of photographic
   cover prior to the attack on the plant
   early in 1944 suggests that on the basis
   of the size of buildings, etc., the T. N. T.
   capacity may be of the order of 40,000
   tons per annum. There are two large
   T. N. T. manufacturing units which appear
   to be identical, and one smaller unit of
   somewhat different layout. Some new

- 606 -

  construction was then in hand, but it is not
  yet clear whether this was intended for high-
  explosives manufacture or not. The photographs
  suggest that, in addition to T. N. T. amatol
  is also prepared in this plant by mixing some
  part of the T. N. T. production with ammonium
  nitrate. This may be the explanation of the
  very high figures for T. N. T. output which
  have been given from some sources.

  Ground sources have suggested that there are
  two factories making explosives at Schbnebeck.
  This is not confirmed by air photographs, and
  it is suggested that the second explosives
  factory reported is in fact the Patronen
  Zündhütchen und Metallwarenfabrik, which is
  a fuse-making establishment in the neigh-
  bourhood., and which has mounded buildings
  for the storage of explosives and detonators.

  The high-explosives factory lies in open
  country on rising ground on the south bank
  of the river Elbe, about 2 km. due west of
  Schbnebeck railway station, and 1J km. south-
  west from the river bank.

  Ground reports have stated that shells are
  also filled in this factory, but air
  photographs do not confirm this, and it would
  be very unusual practice to use an explosives
  factory for filling weapons. It is probable,
  however, that there is a filling factory in
  the immediate neighbourhood.

  The factory was almost completely destroyed
  only in 1944, probably as a by-product of the
  raid of January 21/22, 1944 on Magdeburg.

Chemische Werke      Schönebeck (-)

  The Chemische Werke Schbnebeck A.G. are
  makers of heavy chemicals, including hydro-
  chloric acid, sodium sulphate and finished
  materials for the ceramic industry.
  They employed some 500 workers before the
  .war. 


SCHÖNINGEN (Brunswick)
52° 10' N. 11° E: 475 miles: (10,000)

  Schbhingen is 15 miles South-east of the town of Brunswick and
is on a branch railway line leading from Magdeburg via Wolfenbüttel
to Brunswick. There .are small iron foundries and makers of
agricultural machinery and implements including dairy equipment;
tiles and earthenware pipes are also produced.

- 607 -

 Chemicals and Explosives

  Bourjau & Co.       Schöningen (-)

  The Bourjau & C0.K.G. is owned jointly
  by the I. G. Farben and the Sachtleben Ä.G.
  of Homberg. Bourjau are dye manufacturers
  and producers of lithopone.


SCHRAMBERG (Württemberg)
48° 15' N. 8° 25' E: 440 miles:    (16,000)

  Schramberg is in the central area of the Black Forest 30 miles
North-east of Freiburg. It is at the terminus of a small branch
railway from Schiltach which in its turn is connected at Hausach with
the main railway line from Offenburg through the Black Forest to
Donaueschingen. As with many similar remote towns in the Black Forest,
watch and clock making is the traditional industry. In the case of
Schramberg, however, the development of the firm of Junghans has given
the town outstanding importance in this branch. Apart from a few minor
watch makers, the activities of Schramberg are entirely concerned with
the Junghans works.

 Engineering and Armaments

  Junghans       Schramberg (1)
  The Gebr. Junghans A.G. Uhrenfabriken are
  the largest individual firm of watch and
  clock makers in the Blade Forest area. In
  peacetime they employed some 5,000 workers
  and were capable of producing watches and
  clocks at the rate of 27,000 daily. The
  parent works of the concern are in Schramberg
  and include, in addition to the large watch-
  making factory, a section devoted to the
  manufacture of the precision tools required
  in this industry. a separate saw mill and
  woodworking factory, also in Schramberg,
  prepares the wooden casings for the clocks.  .
  The works has its own hydro-electric power
  plant. A branch factory in Lehengericht, 5
  miles North of Schramberg, makes watch
  springs. There is a second smaller watch
  factory in Schwenningen 15 miles to the
  South East of Schramberg, and a components
  factory in Rotteriburg 30 miles to the North-
  east of Schramberg.

  The factories in Schramberg, which are now
  said to number three separate plantF, are
  believed to employ some 1J,000 workers and^
  in addition to a fairly wide range of
  precision instruments, are now largely
  turned over to the manufacture of fuzes.
 
 - 608 -

  Together with the firm Gebr. Thiel df Ruhla
   in Thuringia, this production of fuzes
   is reported to amount to 100,000 daily.
  There is an apprentices' school in Schramberg
   where up to 200 mechanics and watch makers
   are under training. During the latter half
   of 1943 the number of foreign workers, which
   had hitherto been small, was increasing
   continually, mostly Frenchmen and Ukrainians
   of both sexes being engaged.

  Although the firm's payroll has increased
   from 5,000 to 13,000 in the course of the
   war it is unlikely that the number of
   workers actually employed in the Junghans
   factories has increased to any major extent
   because they were already working to
   capacity before the war. It is assumed
   that seme 7,000 to 8,000 workers are employed
   by sub-contractors or are "home workers'.


- 609 -


SCHWABACH (Bavaria)
49° 20' N. 11° E: 515 miles:   (15,000)


 Schwabach is 7 miles South of Nürnberg on the main railway line
to Munich. The town has specialised for many generations in the
production of needles of all kinds, and also in the manufacture of
gold and silver leaf. The industries are in the hands of a nunfoer of
small and medium-sized firms which employ practically the whole
working population of the town, and which in peacetime did a large
export trade. The firms mentioned below are given as examples. It is
believed that their production is now largely turned over to armaments.


  Engineering and Armaments

 Drei-S Werk Schwabach (-)

 Staedter & Uhl Schwabach -)
 

   The above are two examples of a number of
   factories in Schwabach making needles for all
   purposes, including special needles for the
   textile industry, surgical needles, and
   gramophone needles. It is reported that these
   plants are now producing machine-gun and
   small-arms components and precision parts for
   aircraft.


Hütt linger Schwabach (3)

   Johann Leonhard Hüttlingen is one of several
   small firms in Schwabach which specialise in
   making coiled and spiral metal springs and
   other fine wire products.


 Peter Schlüpfinger Schwabach (-)


 Fritz Ronetsch Schwabach -)


   The above are examples of a large number of
   small films and workshops in Schwabach
   engaged in gold beating and the manufacture
   of gold and silver leaf.


SCHWÄBISCH-GMÜND (Württemberg)
48° 50' N. 9° 50' E: 480 miles:  (22,000)

 Schwübisch-Giriünd is 26 miles East of Stuttgart. The town specialises
in gold and silver products, the manufacture of real and imitation
Jewellery, and in small metal goods of silver and silver alloys. There
is a large number of firms engaged in this trade, none of which is
individually of great importance. There is also a branch works of the
a^ⁿra^^brik riedrichshafen A.G. , makers of gears and gearboxes (see
under Friedrichshafen).

- 610 -

SCHWÄBISCH-HALL (Württemberg)
49° 5' N. 9° 45' E: 465 miles:   (15,000)

 Schwübisch-Hall is }0 miles North—east of Stuttgart on the mein
line connecting Stuttgart with Nürnberg. It is primarily a health
resort and noted for its curative brine baths. The industries
include production of building materials and a cotton spinning mill,
and the manufacture of electrical cooking and heating appliances. None
is of individual importance.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Fr.Gross Jr. A.G,     Schwabisch-Hall (-)

   The Frₒ Gross Jr. A.G. are makers of electric
  kettles, cooking utensils, electrically-heated
  cushions, and similar products. They employed
  400 workers before the war.

 

SCHWANDORF (Bavaria)
49° 20' N. 12° 5' E: 555 miles:  (11,000)

 Schwandorf is on the river Nab, a tributary of the Danube, and
is 15 miles North of Regensburg. It is on the main North to South
railway line from Hof via Regensburg to Munich and is the Junction
for a branch line leading Eastwards to Furth im Walde on the former
Austrian frontier. There is an important alumina works belonging
to the Vawag and a large thermal power station. The other industries
include porcelain manufacture and the exploitation of the brown-coal
deposits in this neighbourhood.

  Public Utility Services

 Power Station       Schwandorf (2)
   The thermal power station known as the Kraftwerk
  Else is situated half a mile South of the Nabwerk
  alumina plant referred to under N.-F. M. M. and F.,
  and adjacent to the brown-coal deposit from which it
  draws its fuel supplies. It is owned by Bayernwerk
  A.G. and has an installed capacity of 81 MW with
  provision for expansion to an ultimate capacity of
  180 MW. Steam as well as electricity are supplied
  to the alumina works.

   The station is on the main 110-kY N-S line
  connected to Chemnitz and Bühlen in the North
  and to the Mittlere Isar hydro stations, Munich,
  and Walchensee in the South. An outdoor switching
  and transformer station adjoins and has switchgear
  for 35kV and 110kV\

   Double-circuit long-distance llOldT lines connect
  to the Bayernwerk grid at Amberg, forking there to
  Nürnberg, and South to Regensburg and Munich,
  forking at Regensburg to Kachlet.

- 611 -

  Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

  Vawag       Schwandorf (1)
  The important Schwandorf works of the
  Vereinigte Aluminium Werke A.G-. , known
  as the Nabwerk, has an annual estimated
  capacity of 80,000 tons of alumina
  Deliveries of alumina are made by this
  plant to the aluminium reduction plant
  at TSging (see under Mühldorf) and to
  the very important new aluminium reduction
  plant at Braunau am Im (Austria).


SCHWEIDNITZ (Silesia)
50° 50' N. 16° 30' E:  720 miles:   (35,000)

  Schweidnitz is 28 miles South-west of Breslau and is on the main
railway line from Liegnitz via Neisse to Upper Silesia. A branch
line connects the town directly with Breslau Schweidnitz is mainly
an agricultural centre, but the electrical engineering works mentioned
below is of some importance, and there is also a small textile industry.
At Saarau 6 miles North of Schweidnitz there is a small synthetic rubber
plant belonging to the Thiokol Ges.m.b.H.

 Transportation

  Railway Repair Shops     Schweidnitz (3)

  These are medium-sized repair shops
  undertaking the repair of goods wagons.
  Some 800 workers are employed.

  Rubber and Tyres

  Thiokol        Saarau  6 miles N.  of Schweidnitz (3)
         

  The Thiokol Ges.m.b.H. , a subsidiary
  company of the Silesia Verein Chemischer
  Fabriken, has a plant in Saarau which was
  erected in 1937 to produce Thiokol under
  licence from the Thiokol Corporation of
  America. The poly sulphide process is used
  and the present annual capacity is estimated
  at 1,000 tons.

  Engineering and Armaments

Heliowatt       Schweidnitz (3)
  The Heliowatt Werke Elektrizit&ts A,G ,
  whose parent works are in Berlin, have
  a branch factory in Schweidnitz which
  before the war employed approximately
  1,000 workers. This firm manufactures
  electrical clocks and measuring instruments,
  switch gear and radio apparatus.

- 612 -

 FrSmbs & Freudenberg Schweidnitz (3)

   The works of this firm Include an iron
  foundry and produce pumps, mining
  machinery, boilers, stationary engines,
  and machinery for sugan factories and
  for the preparation of flax. Some 40O
  workers were employed before the war.

 

SCHWEINFURT (Bavaria)
50° 5' N. 10° 15' E: 460 miles: (60,000)

 Schweinfurt is in the North-western area of Bavaria on the North
bank of the River Main, 25 miles North-west of W&rzburg. It is on the
railway route from Northern Germany to Stuttgart and on the East to
West line from Bamberg to Mainz and the Rhine valley.

 The Main is already navigable for heavy barges as far as
Aschaffenburg, but it is possible that the project to connect the Main
with the Danube has already progressed upstream beyond Schweinfurt,
in which case the hitherto small inland harbour will have increased in
importance.

 Schweinfurt is the largest centre of the German ball bearing
industry and normally produces well over half the total requirements.
This manufacture is carried on mainly in four large factories which
are grouped round the main railway station on the South-western
outskirts of the town. The technical equipment and individual skill
required in this industry, on which many e. and a.
branches depend have been developed over a long period and have made
Schweinfurt a highly specialised industrial community which it is
difficult to transplant or replace.

 As a result of several bombing attacks very severe damage has
been done to the four principal factories.

 Transportation

 Inland Harbour     Schweinfurt (3)
   There is a small harbour on the North bank
  of the River Main in the industrial district
  of Schweinfurt to the West of the town centre.
  This harbour, which is served by railway
  sidings, is close to the V.K.F. plant.
   Until 1939 only the smaller barges could proceed
  up the Main beyond Aschaffenburg, but it is
  possible that the Main-Danube canal project
  is now sufficiently advanced for heavier
  traffic to reach Schweinfurt and Bamberg.

- 613 -

 Railway Junction     Schweinfurt (3)
   The main railway station at Schweinfurt is
   West of the town centre in the industrial
   quarter and in the midst of the chief
   factories which are mentioned below. The
   main line down the Main valley from Bamberg
   to Würzburg passes through Schweinfurt, and
   immediately West of the main railway station
   an important branch diverges and leads
   Northwards to Meiningen. A minor branch
   leads South-east to Gerolzhofen.

 .Railway Repair Shops     Schweinfurt (3)
   These are medium-sized repair shops which
   undertake the repair and maintenance of
   locomotives and goods wagons. They adjoin
   the main railway station.

 Goods Yards      Schweinfurt (3)
   Adjacent to the main railway station are a
   series of goods yards and sidings which
   serve the large factories grouped round
   this area.

 Public Utility Services

 Power Stations      Schweinfurt (3)

   The three important ball-bearing firms
   referred to below under Engineering and
   Armaments have a thermal power station
   attached to each; the station at the Fichtel
   & Sachs works has a reported installed
   capacity of 20 MW. and the other two
   stations a capacity of 11 MW respectively.

 Substation      Schweinfurt (3)
   A substation connects the town area to
   the 110 kV lines coming from the sub-
   stations at Bamberg to the S.E. and
   Würzburg to ths S.W.

- 614 -

 Engineering and Armaments

  V .K.F. (-)

 When in full production the group of Schweinfurt
 factories belonging to this concern formed by far
 the most important unit in the German ball-bearing
 industry. The V.K.F. group employed at least
 10,000 workers. The chief plants are described
 below. This concern extended its range of
 production during the war to include tape n-ro Iler,
 barrel-roller and the heaviest types of bearings,

  V .K.F. Werk I (Schweinfurter Präzisions- Kugellagerwerke Fichte1 & Sachs, W&lzlager Abteilung)  Schweinfurt (1)  
   

 This factory was purchased from the Schweinfurt
 firm of Fichtel & Sachs in 1929. In 1938,
 3,000 to 3500 workers were employed. It
 produced all types of bearing, including the
 majority of the German output of precision
 bearings, and concentrated particularly on
 the finishing and assembling processes,
 receiving part of its requirements of semi-
 products from V.K.F. Werk XI and other sources.

  V .K.F. Werk II (Deutsche Gusstahlkugel &  Maschinenfabrik A.G. vorm. Fries & Hbpf linger) Schweinfurt (1)

 This factory was also acquired in 1929.
 It produced all types of bearings, and was
 also engaged in the production of balls and
 the machining of races for Werk I, where the
 finishing and final assembly was carried out.
 4500 to 5000 workers were employed in 1938,
 It is believed that the plant has been
 extended since । the war by taking over
 neighbouring premises.

 In addition to standard varieties of bearing,
 these two works have also, in recent years,
 taken up the manufacture of the heaviest
 types of bearings, as well as taper-roller and
 barrel-roller bearings. These had formerly
 been imported from Sweden.

  Deutsche Star Kugelhalter G.nub.H.    Schweinfurt (2)
 The section of the V.K.F. concern known as
 the Deutsche Star Kugelhalter G.m.b.H, was
 before the war engaged exclusively on the
 production of ball-bearing cages. They
 supplied these to the other ball bearing
 factories in Schweinfurt and to the open
 market. Approximately 1,000 workers ware
 employed.


  The priority ratings are based op the pre- raid value of these objectives.

- 615 -

  Kugelfischer (Erste Automatische Gusstahlfabrik  vormals F. Fischer) Schweinfurt (1+)


  The Schweinfurt plant of the Kugelfischer
  Schoefer A.G. combine is immediately North
  of the railway line and main station. It
  is the largest single factory in the German
  ball bearing industry and produced all types
  of ball and roller bearings, with the
  exception of the heaviest industrial
  bearings, before the war. 5,000 to 6,000
  hands were employed in 1938, but figure had
  risen to 7,000 by 1939 ^he size of the
  works has been much increased since the
  outbreak of war. It is, therefore, the
  largest individual factory in the German
  ball bearing industry, and reports received
  prior to the air attacks suggested that as
  many as 12,000 workers were employed.


Fichtel & Sachs Ernst Sachs Str. (1)      


  The ball bearing factory belonging to this
  firm was taken over by the V.K.F. and is now
  Werk I of that concern as mentioned above
  The firm of Fichtel & Sachs, .though possibly
  now affiliated with the V.K.F. concern, still
  retains its identity and continues to operate
  under its own name. The works make light
  weight motorcycles, motor boat engines,
  cycle hubs and other motor vehicle components,
  including the F & S patent clutch which is
  widely used in the German motor industry. A
  limited range of small ball-bearings for use
  in their own products is produced in the
  section of the plant retained by Fichtel &
  Sachs. The works has been enlarged since
  1939 and reports suggest that the new workshops
  are mainly engaged on the manufacture of motor
  vehicle components for the open market and
  small arms components and ammunition.

  Chemicals and Explosives

  Deutsche Gelatine      Schweinfurt (3)
  The Deutsche Gelatine Fabriken, whose works
  are North East of the main railway station,
  manufacture gelatine in powder and in sheet
  form for food and technical purposes. The
  products include photographic gelatine for
  film and paper emulsions, and a special
  gelatine for use as a protecting separative for
  photographic films. This firmis the best
  known producer of photographic gelatine in
  Germany. Some 800 workers are employed.

  The priority ratings are based on the pre-
  raid value of these objectives.

SCHELM (Westphalia)

    See under Hagen
 
- 616 -

SCHWENNINGEN (Württemberg)
48° 5' N. 8° 30 E: 455 miles:   (22,000)


  Schwenningen is in the South-western area of Württemberg on the
Eastern side of the Black Forest. It is one of the centres of the
watch and clock making industry which has long been a speciality of
this part of Germany. The principal individual firms are mentioned
below, but a great deal of the work, which engages most of the population
of Schwenningen, is carried on in small workshops dispersed throughout
the town, many of which are in the workers' own homes. The only other
industry worth noting is the manufacture of boots and leggings, which
is represented by four firms, one of vhich is mentioned below.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Kienzle       Schwenningen (2)
  The Kienzle Uhrenfabriken A.G., which is
  believed to employ some 1500 workers on
  its own premises and at least an equal number
  In outside workshops, makes watches, clocks,
  and indicators and precision instruments for
  aircraft, motor vehicles, and for naval purposes.

 Müller-Schlenker     Schwenningen (3)


  The firm of Müller-Schlenker, which is another
  example of several such firms in Schwenningen,
  normally manufactures clocks and watches of
  all kinds. A report mentions this firm as
  undertaking the assembly of a type of clockwork-
  operated small bomb intended to be dropped on
  to hostile aircraft.


 Friedrich Mauthe G.nub.H.    Schwenningen (2)

 T.E.Haller G.m.b.H.     Schwenningen 2)
 BÜrk Sühne K.G.     Schwenningen 2)

  The above are three examples of a large
  number of clock and watoh making firms in
  Schwenningen which in the aggregate form an
  important source of supply of clockwork,
  timepieces, and precision instruments required
  by the armed forces.

  Leather

 Jakob Bürk      Schwenningen (-)

  The firm of Jakob Bürk K.G. is one of four
   factories in Schwenningen making boots,
   shoes, and leggings.

- 617 -

SCHWERIN (Mecklenburg)
53° 35' N. 11° 25' E:  510 miles:  (60,000)

  Schwerin is a garrison town, the capital of the former Grand
  Duchy, and the present administrative centre of the Province of
  Mecklenburg. It is on the Western shore of the Schweriner See,
  a large lake 15 miles South of Wismar, on the Baltic. Mecklenburg
  is an important agricultural area, and Schwerin is one of the
  principal market centres. It is on the railway line from Wismar,
  which joins the main Berlin-Hamburg line at Ludwigslust, 20 miles
  to the South. In peacetime there are. no industries of note,
  but recent reports indicate that the Heinkel works of Rostock have
  a branch at Schwerin which is attaining some importance.

 Transportation

   Railway Repair Shops    Schwerin   (3)
   These are meditm-sized repair shops
   undertaking the repair of goods wagons.

 Aircraft and Aero-Engines

   Heinkel Flugzeugwerke     Schwerin   (-)

   It has been suggested that the Heinkel
   works of Rostock have, in 1943,
   established branch factories in
   Schwerin and at Bad Kleinen at the
   Northern end of the Schwerin I Ake on
   the railway line to Wismar. The report
   suggests that a new type of heavy 4-
   engined flying boat is being built.
   The report has so far remained
   unconfirmed.

- 618 -


SCHWERTE (Westphalia)
51° 25' N. 7° 35' E: 330 miles: (19,000)

 Schwerte is situated on the northern bank of the river Ruhr and at
the South-eastern extremity of the Ruhr industrial area. Included in
the district under consideration are the smaller settlements of
Wellinghofen, Bejminghofon, Westhofen, Wandhofen, Lichtendorf, Holzen,
and Geisecke. Industry is mainly concerned with metal working, but
there are also railway repair shops and marshalling yards.

 Transportation

 Railway Repair Workshops    North-east of Schwerte (3)
   2/5,000 worker^ are engaged on repairs to
  heavy goods locomotives. There are, on an
  average, 100/150'locomotives undergoing
  repairs in the workshops.

 Marshalling lards      Geisecke and West of Schwarte(2)
   The marshalling yards at Schwerte lie at
  Geisecke, North-east of Schwerte, and West
  of Schwerte. The Geisecke yards have the
  capacity to deal with 3,000 wagons per 24
  hours, and those to the West of the town a
  capacity to deal with 2,200 wagons.

 Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys

 Schwerter Profileisenwerk A.G.   Schwerte  (2)
   This firmis a subsidiary of the Vereinigte
  Stahlwerke A.G. The works includes iron
  and steel rolling mills and a bar-drawing
  shop, and produces fittings, pressings and
  sections for locomotives, heavy lorries,
  cars, etc. The works cover an area of
  about 49 hectares.

  Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

 V.D. N. Werke A.G.      W.Schwerte (2)
 
   The Vereinigte Deutsche Nickel Werke A.G.,
  also known as "Basse und Selve" was formerly
  owned by the Westfälische Nickelwalzwerk
  Fleitmann Witte & Co. The factory has an
  estimated productive capacity of 150'tons
  per annum, and covers an area of 60,000 square
  metres. The plant comprises smelting works,
  sheet rolling-mills, wire and pipe drawing
  shops. Various non-ferrous alloys are
  , produced as well as "bimetals", i.e. metal-
  clad steel sheets. The Schwerte branch
  specialises in the production of nickel-clad
  steel, which is of use in the manufacture of
  cartridges and bullet casings. Peace-time
  prodycts were bars, sheets, pipes,and wires
  of nickel, copper, brass, and aluminium and
  other alloys, also coin blanks and kitchen

- 619 -

   and tableware. Additional war-time products are
   hand-grenades and steel helmets. In 1939 this
   factory was said to employ some 2,000 workers.

 Vereinigte Deutsche Nickelwerke A.G.  Metallwerke Wandhofen     Schwerte (2)
   This works,'which belongs to Vereinigte
   Deutsche Nickelwerke A.G., adjoins the
   main factory at Schwerte and is now engaged
   in the manufacture of small-arms ammunition.

  Engineering and Armaments

 Stahlwerke Brhninghaus A.G.    Westhofen (3)
   Mining machinery and narrow-gauge railway
   rolling-stock are produced here.



SENFTENBERG (Brandenburg)
51° 30' N. 14° E: 605 miles:  (19,000)


 Senftenberg is in the extreme South of the Province of Brandenburg
close to the borders of Lower Silesia and of the Prussian province of
Saxony. Some of the surrounding villages which are mentioned below are
in Province Saxony, and Ruhland, 7 miles South West of Senftenberg, is in
Lower Silesia, Senftenberg is 20 miles South-west of Cottbus on a branch
railway from Cottbus via Grossenhain to Dresden. It is in the centre of
the Niederlausitz brown-coal deposits, the exploitation of which forms
its main industry. In addition to the two important groups of mines
described below, there are a number of smaller brown-coal pits, of which
two are described under the heading Annah&tte. Immediately North of the
village of Ruhland is an important synthetic-oil plant which is mentioned
below. Three large thermal power stations derive their fuel from the
brown-coal deposits in this area.

  Transportation

 Marshalling Yards      Senftenberg (3)

   The Senftenberg marshalling yards are
   capable of handling up to 1^,000 wagons
   per 24 hours.


 Public Utility Services

 Power and Gas Works Senftenberg (3)
   The Gas- u. Elektrizitätswerke Senftenberg
   A.G. supplies electricity and gas to the
   town. Electricity is purchased indirectly
   from the Erica, Renate, and Marga power
   stations of the Ilse Bergbau, A.G.

- 620 -

 Power Station Lauchhammer (2)
   The thermal power station belonging to the
  steel worics of the Mitteldeutsche Stahlwerke
  A.G. is situated 2 miles S.E. of the Mari e-
  Anne pit referred to under S. F. It
  has an installed capacity of 98 W. The
  output is mainly supplied to the steel works
  and also to the Company's 2 other works at
  Groditz and Riesa. It is probable that the
  plant has been considerably enlarged but no
  recent information is available. There are
  2 and possibly 5 generator houses, and an
  indoor substation A double-circuit long-
  distance 110 kV line connects to Groditz and
  from there to Riesa. There is probably a line
  to the Marie-Anne and Ruhland-Schwarzheide
  stations.

   A local line at 15 kV connects to nearby pits.

  Power Station      Marie-Anne Pit Muckenberg  (2)
   This thermal power station is adjacent to the
  Marie-Anne brown-coal mine some 6 miles west
  of Senftenberg. The plant, which is owned by
  the Braunkohlen & Brikettindustrie A. G. (Bubiag),
  Muckeriberg, has an installed capacity of 91 MW.
  The plant was considerably extended in 1939
  suggesting new industrial development nearby.
  It is probable that the greater part of the
  output is consumed by the Dr. Alex. Wacker carbide
  plant at Muckeriberg referred to under Chemicals
  & Explosives and that other undertakings are
  also supplied. The station is probably connected
  to the other power stations nearby. Nothing is
  known of long-distance supplies.

  Power Station      Ruhland-Schwarzheide   (2)        

   This thermal power plant forms part of the
  synthetic-oil works at Schwarzheide near
  Ruhland, referred to below under Liquid
  Fuels. It has an installed capacity of
  60 Mff. The generating station supplies steam
  as well as electricity to the works;
  electricity is supplied through medium and low
  voltage underground cables and the station is
  probably connected to the nearby generating
  stations of Lauchhammer and Lauta.

- 621 -

  Solid Fuels

 Bubiag        Senftenberg (3)
   The Braunkohlen & Brikettindustrie A.G.
   (Bubiag) own two mines in the Senftenberg
   area. The first of these is the Marie-Anne
   mine at Kleinleipisch 6 miles West of
   Senftenberg, and the second the Karlgrube at
   Zschornegosda, 5 miles South-west of
   Senftenberg. These mines had an output of
   4,200,000 tons of brown-coal in 1937 Some
   3,000 workers are employed. The company owns
   four briquetting plants in the neighbourhood
   of Senftenberg which, in 1937, produced
   1,400,000 tons of briquettes,

 Mitteldeutsche Stahlwerke     Lauchhammer (3)
   The Mitteldeutsche Stahlwerke A.G-. have a
   brown-coal mine at Lauchhammer, 4 miles West
   of Senftenberg. This mine had an output of
   1,600,000 tons of brown-coal in 1937 and
   employed some 700 workers. A briquetting
   plant, which in 1937 produced 400,000 tons,
   adjoins this mine. The company has a large
   steel plant described below under Iron and
   Steel, and its own power station mentioned
   above under P. U. S.

  Liquid Fuels and Substitutes

 Brabag        Schwarzheide (1)
   The Braunkohle-Benzin A.G. have a large
   synthetic-oil plant situated between the
   two villages of Ruhland and Schwarzheide,
   4 miles South-west of Senftenberg. This
   plant makes oil from brown coal by the
   Fischer-Tropsch process. The annual
   output of synthetic fuel is estimated to
   be 350,000 tons.

  Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys

 Stahlwerke      Lauchhammer (3)
   The Mitteldeutsche Stahlwerke A.G-., whose
   parent works are in Riesa, have a branch
   foundry in Lauchhammer 5 miles West of
   Senftenberg. They normally manufacture
   all varieties of iron castings, and are now
   reported to produce bomb and sheel
   components. This company also owns the brownr
   ooal mine and power station which are
   mentioned above under S. F. and Public
   Utility Services . Several thousand workers are
   employed at the Lauchhammer factory.

- 622 -



 K&hnle, Kopp & Kausch    Senftenberg (3)
   The Khhnle, Kopp & Kausch A.G-. , whose
   parent works are in Frankenthal, are
   reported to have erected a new factory
   in Senftenberg for the production of
   armaments, including shells and grenades.
   More than 1,000 workers are said to be
   employed.

 Berg&Cie       Senftenberg (3)
   The Niederlausitzer Eisenwerk Berg &
   Cie are reported to be employing some
   1500 workers on the manufacture of A.A.
   shells, particularly those of 2.5 cm.
   calibre.



SIEGBURG (Rhineland)
50° 45' N. 7° 10' E: 320 miles:  (22,000)


 Siegburg is East of the Rhine and 10 miles South-east of Cologne.
It is on the River Sieg, a tributary which flows into the Rhine
opposite Bonn, 5 miles South-west of Siegburg. Two miles to the
North-west of Siegburg is the neighbouring settlement of Troisdorf
(which had a pre-war population of 10,000)
where there are works
belonging to the Klbckner concern and a large explosives factory.
The industry of Siegburg itself, apart from the cellulose factory
mentioned below, is largely the making of fire bricks and tiles,
furniture making and woodworking.


Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys


Klbckner Troisdorf (3)

   The Mannstaedt works of the Klbckner Werke A.G-.
   at Troisdorf include a foundry and cold-rolling
   mills producing profiles, frames (including
   chassis frames), girders, sections, and forgings.
   The iron and steel plant belonging to this works
   is estimated to have an annual capacity of
   50,000 tons of pig iron.


 Chemicals and Explosives

 Dynamit A4G. Troisdorf (1)
   This factory is operated by Dynamit A.G.,
   and was of considerable importance in
   19'14/13 During the peace years the
   factory was greatly extended, and took
   over a great many activities, apart from
   the production of explosives. Not only
   is nitro-cellulose made in large quantities
   for the production of celluloid-type plastics,
   but a variety of other plastic materials,
 
 - 623 -

  among which laminated articles made fron
  bakelite are perhaps the most important,
  are also made here. It is quite likely,
  that some explosive nitrocellulose is still
  manufactured here, and indeed this view
  is supported by the examination of air
  photographs. It is difficult to estimate
  what part of the nitrocellulose capacity
  is available for explosives manufacture.
  The total installed capacity represents
  about 12,000 tons per annum, but the
  majority of this will certainly be used
  for plastics manufacture.

  The factory is important as being one of
  the largest producers of detonators in
  Germany. It introduced the manufacture of
  lead azide detonators in aluminium caps.
  Even before the war the production of these
  detonators was running at the rate of about
  120 million per annum, and there is little
  doubt that it has been increased since. The
  factory prepares its own raw materials for
  detonators, having a sodium azide plant with
  an output in excess of 160 tons per annum.

  The factory is situated 13 miles south-east of
  Cologne.

 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

   Zellwolle A.G.      Siegburg   (3)
  The Rheinische Zellwolle A. G. are makers of
  Viscose staple fibre, for which they had a
  capacity of 60 tons per day. 500 workers
  were employed in this factory before the war.
  It is reported that these works are now
  largely engaged on producing cellulose for
  the explosives industry.
 
SIEGEN (Westphalia)
50° 55' N. 8° E: 355 miles: (37,000)

 Siegen is situated at the Northern end of the extensive iron-
ore deposit of Siegerland-Wieder. The iron ore of this area is
among the best that is mined in Germanyj it is non—phosphoric and
suitable for the production of spiegeleisen and also contains a
proportion of manganese. In 1937 the area produced a minimum amount
of 1517,000 tons of iron ore and employed 4,900 workmen. The output
was mostly consumed by local blast furnaces though a little found its
way to Rhenisch-Westphalia. Siegen is also a junction for three minor
branch lines. It is at the Southern end of a line of industrial
settlements which extend, mostly along the valley of the River Lenne,
fron Siegen to the vicinity of Hagen, and which contain a large
number of rolling mills, wire drawing, and metal working plants, and
foundries. Siegen itself has a number of foundries speci al, i sing in the
production of rollers for steel rolling mills, and is responsible for a
high proportion of the German requirements of this essential component.
The principal works of this kind are mentioned below. Another group 3
 miles to the North of the tcwn are dealt with under the heading Geisweid

- 624 -

 Transportation

  Bailway Repair Shops    Siegen  (3)
  These repair shops employ some 1500
  workers and undertake the repair of
  goods wagons and all kinds of rolling
  stock

 Public Utility Services

  Power station     Siegen  (3)

  A small thermal power station was closed
  down in 1930 but has since been reported
  as working. In 1941 its capacity is
  reported to have been 40 W.

  Gasworks      Siegen  (3)

  In 1936 the municipal gasworks bought
  131 mill, cruft, of gas fron the Westfälische
  Ferngas A.G.

 Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys

  Sieg-Lahn Bergbau A.G.     Siegen  (-)

  This company owns a group of mines South-
  west of Siegen. They produced 560,000
  tons of iron ore in 1937 and employed 1,400
  workmen.

  Gewerkschaft "Eisenzecher Zug"   Eiserfeld-Siegen  (-)
        

  This company operates 2 mines at Eiserfeld,
  6 miles south-west of Siegen. In 1937 the
  output of iron ore amounted to 163,000
  tons and 660 workmen were employed.

  Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G.   Eisem-Siegen (-)

  This company owns 6 mines on the iron ore
  deposit at Eisern, 6 miles south of Siegen.
  In 1937 they had an output of 575,000tons
  of iron ore and employed 2,100 workmen.

 Bergbau-u. Hutten-A.G.    Herdorf-Siegen (-)

  This company owns a mine at Herdorf,
  producing 155,000 tons of iron ore and
  employing 400 workmen in 1937.

  Grube Storch u. Schoneberg   Gosenbach-Siegen  (-)
        

  This company works a mine at Gosenbach whicn
  produced 64,000 tons of iron ore and
  employed 330 men in 1937.
 
 - 625 -
 
  Engineering and. Armaments


  Kolsch-Folzer     Kreuzweg   (3)
  The works of the Kolsch-E^lzer Werke A. G.
  comprise a roll foundry and a turning plant.
  They specialise in the production of
  rollers for all kinds of steel rolling mills,
  as well as rollers for use in the rubber
  and paper industries. Pressure gas
  containers and vessels for the chemical,
  cellulose, soap, and sugar industries are
  made. Before the war this firm employed
  approximately 1,000 workers.

  Gontermann-Peipers     Marienborners tr. (3)
  The Gontermann-Peipers A. G. fur Walzenguss
  & I&ttenbetrieb have a range of products
  similar to Kölsch-Eßlzer. They employed
  some 800 workers before the war. This firm
  has also a small iron and steel works in
  Eiserfeld, 3 miles South of Siegen.

  Eisenbahnbedarf A. G.     Wilhelmstr. (3)
  The Siegener Eisenbahnbedarf A. G., which is
  owned by the Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G.,
  have a pressing and hammer works and normally
  manufacture railway wagons, railroad equipment,
  and latge metal containers. They employed
  approximately 1,000 workers before the war.

  Hüttenwerk Siegerland     Hindenburgstr.  (3)
  The Hüttenwerk Siegerland A.G. is a large
  undertaking which employed a total of seme
  10,000 workers before the war. It belongs
  tö the Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G. of
  Dusseldorf. The Hüttenwerk owns a number of
  iron smelting works and rolling mills and
  expoits mainly the iron-ore deposits of the
  Siegerland. The head office and one of the
  smaller works is in Siegen, but the other
  plants are dispersed over the area of the
  Sieg and Leime valleys, at Niederscheiden 2
   miles South of Siegen, Wissen 15 miles West
  of Siegen, Attendorn in the Lenne valley,
  Nachrodt near Hagen, and Hasten near N.heim.

  Maschinenbau A.G.     Siegen  (2)
  The works of the Siegener Maschinenbau A. G.
   include an iron foundry, and employed
   approximately 1,000 workers before the war.
   . They are now believed to be constructing
   components for U-boat Diesel engines.


- 626 -

Dango and Dienenthal Siegen  (3)


 This firmis one of the principal
 German manufacturers of blast furnaces
 and blast furnace equipment. They
 produce charging machines, pig casting
 machines, Cowper stoves, gas valves and
 a full range of accessories.

Chemicals and Explosives

Dynamit A.G  Wurgsndorf (-)


 This factory was operated by Dynamit
 A.G. in the last war, producing about
 4 per cent, of Gennadys cordite. It
 was officially closed down after the
 Armistice, but by 1933 a trade source
 reported that a number of modern
 explosives buildings had appeared on
 the site. It is reported to be in active
 production at the present time, and to
 be producing propellant powders on a moderate
 scale.



- 627 -

SIEGMAR-SCHÖNAU (Saxony)
50° 50' N. 12° 55' E: 548 miles: (19,000)

 Siegmar-Schönau, though a separate municipality, adjoins Chamita
on the Western side and has been dealt with under the heading Chemnitz.



SIGMARINGEN (Hohenzollern)
48° 5' N. 9° 15' E:   455 miles: (6,000)

 Signaringen is the administrative town of the outlying Prussian
province of Hohenzollern, to the South-west of Württemberg. It is on
the upper reaches of the River Danube and 20 miles North of the Western
end of Lake Constance. Apart from the metal works mentioned below,
there is no important industrial development.

  Engineering and Armaments

 Hohenzollernhfttte     Laucherthal (2)
   The Fürstlich Hohenzollern Httttenverwaltung
   is situated in Laucherthal, a village near
   to Sigmaringendorf 3 miles South-east of
   Sigmaringen. The works comprise rolling mills
   and a wire-drawing plant. Sparking plugs and
   components for precision measuring instruments
   are produced, and supplied among others to Bosch,
   Mannesmann, Rheinmetall, and Junkers. These
   works are reported to have attained additional
   importance since 1943 as suppliers of the
   highest grade anti-friction bearings,
   particularly shell type anti-friction bearings,
   and bearing alloys.



SINDELFINGEN (Württemberg)
48° 45' N. 9° E:   450 miles: (8,000)

 Sindelfingen is 8 miles South-west of Stuttgart and lies
immediately North of Böblingen, which is on the main line railway
leading from Stuttgart to Schaffhausen and Zurich. Böblingen is
dealt with separately. Sindelfingen owes its importance to the nearby
airfield and to the new Daimler-Benz works. There are also reports
that the Heinkel concern in conjunction with Hirth have erected an
important new plant near Sindelfingen. To the North-east of
Sindelfingen, in the settlement of Vaihingen, are a number of email
works, including a textile factory which is mentioned below,

  Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

 Ernst Frank       Sindelfingen (3)
   The works of this firm comprise an
   aluminium and brass foundry, and supply
   components to Robert Boseh of Stuttgart.

- 628 -


  Aircraft and Agro-Engines


 Hirth Motoren     Sindelfingen (-)

  The Hirth Motoren concern, in conjunction
  with Heinkel, are reported to have built
  a large aero-engine works immediately to
  the South of the Sindelfingen aerodrome
  These works are said to have been constructed
  underground and to be almost invisible from
  the air. They undertake the final machining
  of aero-engine components and the assembly of
  aero-engines. The components are said to be
  supplied by a number of Stuttgart firms,
  particularly Mahle and Bosch.

 Daimler-Benz     Sindelfingen (-)

  The Daimler-Benz plant at Sindelfingen,
  which primarily builds motorcar bodies,
  is now reported to have a series of aero-
  engine test beds where aero-engines built
  in the main factory of Daimler-Benz at
  Stuttgart-Unterturkheim are brought for
  testing.


 Daimler-Benz A.G.     Sindelfingen (2)
  The erection of the Sindelfingen body-
  building works of the Daimler-Benz concern
  was begun before the war, but it was only
  in 194-1 that these works developed into the
  important plant which they now are.
  Several thousands of workers are believed to
  be now employed at this works, which is
  known to build heavy military transport on
  a large scale and is reported to be making
  tank components in at least one of its
  workshops.


 Trikotfabriken      Vaihingen (-)

  The Vereinigte Trikotfabriken (R. Vollmoeller)
  A.G. are makers of hosiery and knitted goods.
  They have a second factory at Herrenberg,
  10 miles South-west of Sindelfingen. Some
  700 workers were employed before the war.

  

SINGEN (Baden)
47° 45' N. 8° 50' E: 48O miles: (18,000)

  Singen (Hohentwiel)
is in the extreme South of Baden close to
the Swiss frontier and 10 miles North-east of Schaffhausen (Switzerland)
It is on the main railway line from Stuttgart to Zurich and is the
German Customs Station for the traffic along this route. A branch line
leads South-east from Singen to Konstanz 15 miles distant, where it
Joins the Swiss railway along the Southern shore of Lake Constance,
'he principal industries of Singen are mentioned below.

- 629 -

 Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

   Aluminium Walzwerke     Singer  (2)
   The Aluminium Walzwerke Singen G.m.b.H,
   are fabricators of sheet aluminium, for
   which their mills have a capacity of
   1500 tons per month. They make a wide
   variety of aluminium alloys and coatings,
   including many which are their own. patented
   specialities. They are also producers of
   aluminium foil. The works is an important
   supplier of materials to the aircraft
   industry and may itself undertake the
   manufacture of finished aircraft components.

 Engineering and Armaments

   Georg Fischer (Fittingwerke)  Singen  (2)
   The A.G. der Eisen & Stahlwerke vorm.
   Georg Fischer are iron and steel founders
   and prior to the war specialised in
   fittings, connecting pieces, and joints
   for metal tubing, including high-pressure
   steam, gas, water, air, and vacuum pipe
   systems, central heating and drainage
   installations. They are a branch of the
   Swiss firm of the same name in Schaffhausen,
   and have another branch works in Mettmann in
   the Rhineland. The Singen works is now
   partly turned over to armaments and is
   producing mainly aerial bombs, mortar bombs
   of all types, and artillery shells of medium
   calibre. Other products include exhaust
   pipes for tanks and autbmobiles, and wheels
   and other motor transport components. The
   factory is now said to employ some 3,000
   workers, a proportion of whom are drawn
   from Schaffhausen and the neighbouring parts
   of Switzerland.


   Maggi G.m.b.H.      Singen  (3)
   These are the chief works of this concern,
   which is the leading German maker of soup
   cubes and flavouring essences. They are
   now reported to be producing entirely
   for Government requirements and to be
   making food stuffs in compressed form for
   use by the armed forces.

- 630 -

SOEST (Westphalia)
51° 35' N. 8° 5' E: 355 miles:   (23,000)

 Soest is 15 miles South-east of Hamm and is on a main Tail way
line which leads from Saxony and Magdeburg to the Lower Rhineland.
In addition to the large railway repair shops, the industries include
several engineering works, the manufacture of electric light bulbs,
and a number of me tai- working firms making nuts, bolts, and rivets.
Soest is also an agricultural centre, and there are large flour mills.

  Transportation

 Railway Junction     Soest  (3)
   The East to West railway line through
  Halberstadt and Paderborn divides at
  Soest, one branch leading to Hamm, and
  the other to Dortmund. This line forms
  an important direct route from the Ruhr
  and Lower Rhineland to the Magdeburg and
  Brunswick areas and to Saxony. A branch
  line leads Southeast from Soest, and
  other minor branch railways serve the
  district to the North-west between Soest
  and Haram.

 Marshalling lard     Soest  (2)
   The marshalling yard is situated across
  the North border of the town, and has
  capacity for handling 4,4^0 wagons per
  24 hours. It is an exceptionally busy yard,
  on one of the main routes to and from the
  Ruhr. N.xt to the route through Hamm from
  Berlin, the route through Soest between
  Breslau, Leipzig, Swindmünde, and the Ruhr
  probably hamiles the heaviest traffic in
  Germany. Soest is the main supply marshalling
  yard dealing with traffic to and from the
  Ruhr from Central and E-stern Germany and would
  bear the main weight of all the Ruhr traffic
  if Hamm were seriously damaged.

 Railway Repair Shops     Soest  (3)
   These repair shops, which are #est of the
  marshalling yards, undertake the repair and
  maintenance of locomotives and other rolling
  stock, and employ some 1,5^0 workers.

  Public Utility Services

 The M&hne dam and hydro-electric power station Gönne, near Soest (-)
         


   The Mfthne dam and its power station are
  situated 6 miles South-west of Soest and
  25' miles East of Dortmund, at the North-west
  corner of the reservoir known as the McShne
  Talsperre. The dam was built to improve
  the flow of the Ruhr by controlling water
  Shortage in the Ruhr valley in the dry
  seasons, so that the pumping stations which
 

- 631 -


   provide water for the Ruhr industrial
   area and for the hydro-electric plants
   along the river may be supplied with
   water at all periods, The s even MW
   lyrdro-electric power station is
   operated by the Vereinigte Elektrizi-
   tätswerke Westfalen A.G, (VEW). It is
   situated immediately below the dam.
   In May, 1943, the dam was breached in
   an air attack, the power station was
   washed away, and the reservoir, which
   extended some 6 miles East and 3 miles
   South-east of the dam, was drained of
   its water.


 Engineering and Armaments

Wilhelm Hagen Thomästr. (3)

    The Accumulatorenfabrik Wilhelm
    Hagen have their works South of the
    railway marshalling yards and are
    believed to be making accumulators for
    submarines,

  Merkur      Niederbergheimerstr. (-)

    The Glühlampenwerk Merkur G,m.b,H,
    are makers of electric light bulbs,

  GrÜte Grage    Niederbergheimerstr. (3)
    The Grttte Grage & Co,G,m.b.H. are
    iron founders and specialise in the
    manufacture of turntables and other
    railway equipment.

- 632 -


SOLINGEN (Rhineland)
51° 10' N. 7° 05' E: 312 miles: (153,600)

 The Solingen district lies across the highland separating the
Rhine and the Wupper valleys, and covers a total area of about thirty
square miles. It includes the following towns and villages:-

(1)Solingen, with a population of 142,000 including Wald, Ohligs,
  Grafrath and Hbhscheid.

(2)Haan, with a population of 11,600


    Total 153,600



 The city of Solingen itself lies 740 feet above sea-level in a
bend of the river Wupper, about seven miles South of Wuppertal. It
is connected by rail with the great industrial centres of the Ruhr,
but is not in itself an important railway centre.

 Solingen is known as'the Sheffield of Germany” on account of
its world-famous light engineering industry which is mainly concerned
with the production of cutting machines, tools, knives, scissors, and
surgical instruments. Bicycles and components for motor vehicles and
small arms are also manufactured.

 The suburbs of the city - Wald to the North-west, Ohligs to the
West, and Gr&frath. to the North - are also industrialised, and some
of the larger engineering plants are to be found in these areas.

 The outlying settlements of the Solingen district are, for the
most part, non-industrial, with the exception of Haan whose fair-
sized engineering works were mainly engaged on the production of cutlery.


 Transportation

Railway Junction & Marshalling Yard  Solingen (3)
Of local importance only, serving
the Solingen engineering industry.

Railway Junction & Marshalling Yard  Ohligs  (3)
Of local importance only, serving
the engineering industry in this area.
Liquid Fuels and Substitutes

St&dtische Gaswerke    Solingen (3)
   The Municipal gasworks lie south of
  Solingen main passenger station
  adjoining the Zwillingswerk of J. A.
  Henckels. No gas is actually produced
  here, but the company purchased from
  the Ruhr gas grid (Ruhrgas A.G.) for
  resale about 785,000,000 cubic feet
  of gas in 1936.

- 633 -

Städtische Gaswerke Solingen-Ohligs (3)
  This small municipal gas-works lies
  directly to the East of Ohligs marshalling
  yard and supplies gas to the suburb of
  Ohligs. Its activity is included in the
  above sales figure.


 Engineering and Armaments


  Kronprinz A. Gw für Lie tall Industrie Solingen-Ohligs (2)
  A subsidiary of MannesmannrÖhren-
  Werke A.G. , Düsseldorf, this works lies
  North-east of Ohligs main station. It is
  important chiefly for its manufacture of
  components, particularly wheels, for motor-
  vehicles, aircraft, tanks, etc. Other
  production includes S.A.A. , and steel tubes
  from 5 to 100 mm. in diameter. The number
  of workers employed is believed to exceed
  4,000. It is also reported that in
  addition to the above, this firmis making
  undercarriages for Ju.88's, 87's and Me. 210's,
  and other, mainly minor, aircraft components.


J.A.Henckels Solingen  (2)

  There are two branches of this firmin
  Solingen. The larger of the two, which
  is known as the Zwillingswerk is situated
  South of and adjoining the Solingen main
  station and before the war manufactured
  special steels for cutlery, saws, scissors,
  etc,, but is now stated to be producing
  S.A.A. and small-arms components, bayonets,
  and daggers. Several thousand workers are
  employed.

  The smaller branch of the company in the
  suburb of Weyer, North-east of Ohligs, is
  engaged on the production of S.A.A. , small-
  arms components, and precision parts for
  aircraft and instruments. The plant employs
  1500 workers.

  Rudolf Rautenbach      Solingen- Mangerburg (1)

  Covering a very closely built-up area
  of approximately 250'square yards, this
  firm's plant in Solingen-Mangerburg is
  considered to be the largest light-metal
  casting plant in Germany and even in 1933
  was believed to be engaged on war production.

  Aluminium and magnesium castings are produced
  here, particularly in the form of engine
  components such as crank-cases, air-cooled
  cylinder heads, oil-castings, cast pistons,
  and piston-rings. Junkers and B.M.W. absorb
  much of the engine-component output and the
  firm also supplies Messerschmitt with
 
 - 634 -
 
   undercarriage components and brake-drums
   for Messerschmitt aircraft of which it is
   the principal producer. The factory site
   includes a large experimental foundry and
   extensive research laboratories. More than
   2500 workers are believed to be employed.

W.K.C. Y' affenf abrik G. m.b.H. Solingen-Witkulle (-)

The firmis said to possess an underground
plant in the suburb of Wittkulle, employing
more than 1,000 workers on the production
of armaments.

Patria W.K.C. Fahrradfabrik Solingen Hans A% May Solingen-Obengbnrath   (-)

  Manufacture of bicycles.

Solinger Fahhradfabrik F.H. Schaaf Solingen   (-)

Situated in the North-east of the city,
this firm manufactures bicycles.

"Ariso” G. Arimont Sbhne -Heidburg (-)

Manufacture of bicycles.

Metallwerke Ohligs G.m.b.H. (Controlled by Kronprinz A.G.) Solingen-Ohligs (3)
  Motor-vehicle and bicycle components are
  manufactured at this factory, which is a
  subsidiary of the Manne smannr'dhren-Werke,
  A.G., Düsseldorf.

Oswald Forst G.m.b.H. Solingen   (3)

  This factory is situated North of
  Meisenburg, and is engaged on the
  production of machine tools. It is
  believed to employ some 2jjOO workers.

C.Grossmann, Eisen- u. Stahlwerk A.G. Solingen-Witkulle (3)

  In the suburb of Witkulle, this factory
  produces malleable iron castings, grey
  cast iron, steel castings, axle bearings,
  etc.

F.Klopp G.m.b.H. Maschinenfabrik^ onderwerk für Schnellhobler Solingen-Wald (3)


   Planing machinery is the main production
   of this factory, which is situated at Wald-
   Itterberg. 500 workers are believed to
   be employed.

- 635 -

F. W. Beckmann, Solinger Schleif- u. Polier-Artikel Fabrik G-. m.b, H. Solingen (3)
lying due North-east of the Solingen
main station, this factory produces
precision machine tools and grinding
and polishing machinery. It occupies
an area of 5,400 square metres on a
site of 13,000 square metres.

Brangs & R611 Maschinenfabrik    Solingen (-)
This works lies South of the
Solingen main station and manufactures
grinding and polishing machinery
for the cutlery industry.

Th. Kieserling & Albrecht Maschinenfabrik- u. Eisengiesserei   Solingen (-)
   
Saws, shears, rolling-mill equipment
for the metal industry, drop stamps,
and spring swaging hammers are
produced at this factory.

Chemicals and Explosives

Durofol K. G. , J. Brangs & Co.   Solingen (-)
This works lies West of the Zwillingswerk
and the main Solingen passenger station.
It manufactures plastics.

Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

 Ohligs er Leinen -und Bauxnwoll-Weberei A.G. Solingen-Ohligs (-)

   In 1938 this firm employed J20 workers
   on the production of webbing for driving
   belts, fitter cloth, etc.

- 636 -

SÖMMERDA (Province Saxony)
51° 10' N.  11° 10' E:   485 miles: (15,000)

 Sömmerda lies 15 miles North of Erfurt on a branch railway-
line leading from Sangerhausen to Erfurt. In addition to the
important branch works of the Rheinmetall-Borsig, the manufacture
of small arms and ammunition is, even in peacetime, an established
industry in Sömmerda which has been greatly extended during the war.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Rheinmetall-Borsig     Sömmerda (2)
   The Sömmerda factory of this concern
   in peacetime made typewriters and
   calculating machines, of which
   Rheinmetall was a large producer.
   Motorcar driving shafts and other
   components were also made. The
   plant is now making bomb components,
   principally light-alloy parts, fuzes,
   incendiary bomb casings, delayed
   action mechanisms, and electrical
   components. One section of the works
   is making leaf springs and transmission
   shafts for tanks. Over 3,000 workers
   are believed to be employed.

 Selve Kronbiegel      Sömmerda (2)
   The Selve Kronbiegel-Domheim A. 0.
   were prior to the war manufacturers
   of detonators and sporting ammunition.
   They are now important makers of
   S.A.A. and are believed to have
   increased the number of their workers
   from 900, which was their peacetime
   complement, to over 3,000. The
   company, which originated in Altena,
   acquired the munition firms Braun &
   Bloem of Düsseldorf and Dreyse &
   Collenbusch of Sömmerda, and in 1925
   transferred their headquarters and
   the whole of their production to
   Sömmerda.



SOMMERFELD (Brandenburg)
51° 45' N. 15° E: 640 miles:   (11,000)

 Sommerfeld is in South-eastern Brandenburg on the railway
from Frankfurt/Oder to Breslau. It is the junction for two minor
branch railway lines. Industry is mainly textiles and is in the
hands of several small firms. There are also two large brick and
tile manufacturers. It has been reported that in the latter part
of 1943 the Telefunken Radio concern of Berlin had transferred some
of their departments to Sommerfeld and had converted one of the
textile factories for this purpose.

- 637 -

 Transportation

 Railway Repair Shops    Sommerfeld (3)
   These are medium-sized repair shops
   undertaking the repair of goods wagons.

  Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

 Tuchfabrik       Südstr.  (-)

   The Tuchfabrik A. G. vorm. Fischer
   Schnabel A.G. are manufacturers of
   cloth for civil and military
   requirements. Their weaving mill
   had 96 weaving stools before the war,
   when some 400 workers were employed.
   They are an example of several small
   textile factories in Sommerfeld.
 

SONNEBERG (Thuringia)
50° 20' N. 11° 10' E:   500 miles: (20,000)

 Sonneberg is on the Southern edge of the Thüringer Wald,
10 miles North-east of Coburg. It is a tourist resort for
visitors to the Thuringian hills, and is regarded as the centre
of the manufacture of dolls and childrens toys in which, in
peacetime, a large trade is done, both inside Germany and for
export. There is a great number of firms which are normally
engaged in this industry. A woodworking firmin Sonneberg is
mentioned below under Aircraft and Aero-Engines.

  Aircraft and Aero-Engines

 Hartwig      Sonneberg (-)

   The firm of Robert Hartwig,normally a
   woodworking and furniture-making
   factory, was reported in 1942 to be
   constructing gliders.

  Engineering and Armaments

 Siemens-Schuckert A.G.     Sonneberg (3)
   This small factory makes cartridge
   detonators ,and a small variety of
   minor electrical appliances.

 
SONNENBURG (Brandenburg)
52° 35' N. 14° 50' E:   635 miles: (4,000)

 Sonneriburg is 7 miles East of Küstrin on a branch railway line.
It is on the southern edge of the wide stretch of marshland formed
by the River Warthe near to its Junction with the Oder at Küstrin.
Normally the industries are on a small scale and chiefly devoted to
woodworking, including the manufacture of clogs.

- 638 -

 Engineering and Armaments


 Ammunition Factory      Sonneriburg (-)

   Ground reports suggest that in the woods
   near Sonnenburg there is a large explosives
   dump and shell-filling factory, reported
   to employ some 1,600 workers in 1942. The
   factory was accomodated in temporary
   buildings pending construction of a new
   plant. Railway sidings lead through the
   woods to the bunkers. The whole process
   of she11-filling and assembly is carried
   out here for calibres ranging from 21 cm.
   artillery shells to S.A.A. A proportion
   of the labour consists of Russian men and
   women.



SORAU (Brandenburg)
51° 40' N. 15° 10' E: 655 miles:  (24,000)

 Sorau is in the extreme South-east of the province of
Brandenburg on the main railway line from Cottbus to G-logau and
Breslau. A branch line leads from Sorau Southwards to Görlitz.
The peacetime industry is mainly in the hands of a number of
medium-sized textile factories, but Sorau is one of the localities
in Eastern Germany to which a proportion of the aircraft production
of the Focke-Wulf concern of Bremen has been transferred.

  Aircraft and Aero-Engines

 Focke-Wulf      Sorau  (2)
   The Focke-Wulf aircraft assembly plant at
   Sorau is one of the last of this firm's
   newly-erected plants to come into
   production. It is believed that the works
   is exclusively engaged on the assembly of
   IW-190'3 and that components are imported
   from Kottbus and Posen. Minor components
   are manufactured at Sorau in six small factories
   at least two of which were formerly textile
   mills.

  Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

 Mechanische Weberei     priebuserstr. (-)

   The Mechanische Weberei Sorau vorm.
   F. A. Mar tin & Co.A.G have a cotton
   and linen weaving mill which employed
   some 600 workers before the war. This
   is one of several medium-sized weaving mills
   in Sorau.

 Hoffmann       Sorau  (-)

   The Erdmann Hoffmann A, G are cloth
   manufacturers who employed some J00
   workers before the war.

- 639 -


SPEYER (Bavaria)
49° 20' N. 8° 25' E: 410 miles:    (28,000)

 Speyer is in the Bavarian palatinate on the left bank of the
Rhine 10 miles South of Ludwigshafen Apart from the aircraft
factory described below, the industries include cotton spinning,
boot and shoe manufacture, and brick and tile making. Speyer is
one of the centres of the palatinate wine trade, and there are
also a large number of cigar and tobacco factories. The inland
harbour and a small shipbuilding yard are mentioned below.

 Transportation

 Inland Harbour      Speyer   (-)

   The inland harbour of Speyer was extended
   and reconstructed in 1924 and is well
   equipped with loading and storage facilities.

  Aircraft and Aero-Engines

 Saarpfalz G.m.b.H.      Speyer   (2)
   The Flugzeugwerke Saarpfalz G.m.b,H.
   were, prior to the war, engaged on the
   assembly of Klenrc 55B trainer aircraft.
   The share capital of this company was
   increased in 1941 from 40,000 to
   1,000,000 Reichsmark. The plant has
   been extended during the war and since
   1940 it has been engaged on repair to
   Messerschmitt fighters. Some 1500
   workers are believed to be employed.

 Shipbuilding

 Josef Braun       Speyer   (-)

   This shipbuilding firm, which normally
   builds barges and river craft on a small
   scale, is now reported to be constructing
   E-boats,

 

SPREMBERG (Brandenburg)
51° 30' N. 14° 25' E:  625 miles:   (14,000)

 Spremberg in the Niederlausitz is in the extreme South of
Brandenburg close to the border of Lower Silesia. It is on the
right bank of the River Spree, and on a branch railway which runs
from Cottbus, 10 miles to the North, to Görlitz. The chief '
importance of the town is due to its chemical factories. The
large electric power station at Trattendorf lies 2 miles South of
Spremberg. Cloth manufacture is represented by a number of
factories which are individually on a small scale but in the
aggregate provide a considerable output of textile goods.

 - 640 -

 Public Utility Services


  Power Station      Trattendorf (2)
  This thermal power station, situated
  2 miles South of Spremberg, is owned
  by Elektrowerke A. G. It has an
  installed capacity of 196 MW. The
  station was rebuilt in 1921 and forms,
  with the large Lauta station 13 miles
  to the South-west, the nucleus of a
  group of power stations known as the
  Niederlausitzer Kraftwerks-Gruppe.
  The Trattendorf station is adjacent to
  the calcium carbide works of the Lonza
  Elektrochemische Fabriken G. m. b. H.,
  referred to below under Chemicals and
  Explosives. Fuel is obtained from the
  brown-coal mines in this area

  A medium-voltage and 100-kV substation
  is attached to the station. Medium-
  voltage supplies are given to the
  adjacent works, to the towns of Spremberg
  nearby, Cottbus, 15 miles to the North,
  to the district of Hoyerswerde, 10 miles to
  the South, and to the medium-voltage
  grid of the Elektrowerke,

  Five double-circuit 100-kV lines connect
  to Breslau, Berlin-Spandau, Berlin-
  Friedrichsfelde, Guben, and Lauta
  respectively.

 Chemicals and Explosives

  Lonzawerke       Trattendorf (3)
  The Lonzawerke Elektrochemische Fabriken
  G.m.b.H. have a carbide plant near the
  electric power station at Trattendorf, 2
  miles South of Spremberg, which,
  together with this firm's Waldshut factory,
  has a capacity of 100,000 tons of carbide
  per annum.

  H'RÖmmler A.G.     Spremberg (3)
  The H, RÖmmler A. G, are owned by the Brown
  Boveri & Co. , AG of Mannheim and are
  manufacturers of plastics. They are among
  the leading German producers of tar-acid
  and urea resins. Before the war approximately
  1,000 workers were employed at the Spremberg
  plant.

- 641 -
 

  Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper


 Carl Mhller Spremberg (-)

 Fr, W.Heinze G.m.b.H. Spremberg -)

 Georg Wissinger Spremberg -)

   The above are medium-sized cloth
   factories given as examples of ten
   similar mills in Spremberg.


STADE (Hanover)
53° 35' N. 9° 30' E: 430 miles:  (15,000)

 Stade is 25 miles West of Hamburg on the railway to Cuxhaven.
It is on the Western side of the Elbe, 4 miles distant from the
river bank. A leather tannery and a rubber factory are mentioned
below, and there are several small-scale industries, including oil-
refining, hemp and wool spinning, and the manufacture of wooden
pulley blocks.


  Rubber and Tyres


Gebr. Schmidt  Stade  (-)


   This factory makes various rubber goods,
   particularly insulated coverings for the
   cable industry, and is also believed to
   make bicycle tyres.


  Leather


Lederfabrik Konmandantentrich (-)


   The Stader Lederfabrik A.G. employed some
   500 workers and had a well-equipped tannery
   with a pre-war capacity for 1,000 skins per
   day. They manufactured sole leather and
   are known to have achieved a good scale of
   production of russet leather as used by the
   armed forces.



STADELN (Bavaria)
19° 30' N. 11° E: 505 miles:  (1,200)

  Stadeln is 3 miles North of Fhrth near to the railway
station of Vach on the line from Nörriberg to Erlangen. Its
only importance is due to the Chemical Works mentioned below.


- 642 -

  Chemicals and Explosives


 Dynamit A.G, Stadeln (3)
   This factory is operated by Dynamit A. G
   and was formerly owned by the Rheinisch-
   Westfälische Sprengstoff A.G,


   Pre-war reports do not suggest that the
   factory was of great size, although a large
   area of ground was reserved for it. A
   report dated 1938 states that while over 400,000
   square metres of land were allocated to the
   factory, only some 22,000 square metres had
   been used for buildings at that time.

   Photographic reconnaissance of July, 1942,
   shows that the factory has now been much
   enlarged. Its chief function is plainly the
   manufacture of T. N. T. , and it is estimated
   on the basis of size of buildings that its
   output would be at least 20,000 tons per
   annum. It seems likely that penthrite or
   tetryl are also made at this factory, and
   there are certain buildings similar to those
   usually associated with the manufacture of
   detonators.







STARGARD (Pomerania)
53° 20' N. 15° E:  650 miles: (41,000)

 Stargard is 23 miles East of Stettin and is a railway Junction
of some importance to the traffic between Stettin and Eastern
Germany, To the West of Stargard is the MadCi See on which there is
now a seaplane base. Apart from the large railway repair shops
mentioned below there are no industries of importance in Stargard.
Stargard in Pomerania must not be confused with Starogard (or
Preussisch-Stargard)
which is in the Polish Corridor 20 miles West
of Marienburg,

 Transportation

 Railway Junction     Stargard (3)
   The railway line, which runs from Stettin
   parallel with the Baltic coast through
   Belgard and Stolp to Danzig, passes through
   Stargard. A second line diverges at Stargard
   and leads South-east to join the main Berlin-
   Danzig line at Kreuz in the Polish Corridor.
   A further branch line leads South-west from
   Stargard to Peyritz.

 Railway Repair Shops     Stargard (3)
   These are large repair shops which undertake
   the repair of locomotives and rolling stock,
   and employ some 1,900 workers.

- 643 -

  Aircraft and Aero-Engines

   Seaplane Base      Madft See (3)
   The Madtt Lake is 4 miles West of Stargard
   and is some 8 miles in length At the
   North-eastern end of the lake are the
   hangars and hutments of a seaplane base
   which uses this lake as an alighting zone.

 

STASSFURT (province Saxony)
51° 50' N. 11° 35' E:  505 miles: (16,000)

   Stassfurt is 5 miles North-west of Bernburg and is the centre
  of an important salt-mining district. The Stassfurt saline
  deposits are the best known in the world for the supply of
  potassium salts; not only mines, however, but potash refineries
  exist in profusion in the area,each of the four or five chief
  producing companies having two or more factories for the production
  of potash fertilizers and refined potash salts. The important
  Junkers aircraft components factory at Stassfurt forms one of the
  chain of Junkers plants which are grouped in this part of Germany.
  The remaining industries of Stassfurt are not of particular
  importance.

  Aircraft and Aero-Engines

   Junkers Flugzeug- & Motorenwerke  Leopoldshall (2)
   This Junkers aircraft components works is in
   Leopoldshall, which is immediately South-west
   of Stassfurt proper and is now part of the
   same municipality. The works employs several
   thousand workers and makes major components
   and in particular control surfaces. The output
   of this works is supplied to the large Junkers
   final assembly plant at Bernburg, 5 miLss to the
   South-east which also obtains components from
   Aschersleben (8 miles to the South-west),
   Schönebeck (15 miles to the North-east),
   Halberstadt, Oschersleben, and Köthen, Dessau,
   where the parent works of Junkers is situated,
   lies 30 miles East of Stassfurt.

- 644 -


STENDAL (Province Sayony)
52° 35' N. 11° 50' E: 515 miles: (32,000)

  Stendal is 60 miles West of Berlin on the main line from Berlin
to Hanover. It is an important railway junction with large
marshalling yards and repair shops. Apart from the engineering and
metal working firms mentioned below, the industry is chiefly fruit-
preserving and sugar-refining. Stendal is also the centre of a
lepge agricultural area.

 Transportation

 Railway Junction      Stendal (2)
  Stendal is on the main East to West line
  from Berlin through Hanover to the Rhineland
  and to Holland. The lines from Stendal to
  Wittenberge, (on the Berlin-Hamburg route)
  28 miles North of Stendal, and to Magdeburg,
  30 miles to the South, form an important
  direct route between Magdeburg and Hamburg.
  A further branch diverges at Stendal north-
  eastward from the Berlin-Hanover line and
  leads via Ulzen to Bremen and Hamburg. A
  branch line connects Stendal with Tangermfende
  on the Elbe, 7 miles to the South-east, and
  two minor branch lines serve the districts to
  the North-west and North-east.

 Marshalling Yards     Stendal  (2)
  The Stendal marshalling yards have a
  capacity for 4500 wagons per 24- hours.

 Railway Repair Shops      Stendal (3)
  These repair shops undertake the repair
  of locomotives and goods wagons.

  Engineering and Armaments

 L. & C. Arnold       Arnold str.  (-)

  L. & C. Arnold are normally makers of
  iron furniture, and in peacetime had a
  large production of chairs and tables
  which were used in outdoor cafes and
  gardens. They are now believed to be
  engaged on the production of armaments.

 Wilhelm Schreiber     Nikolaistr. (-)

  This firm manufactures agricultural
  machinery and implements and woodworking
  machinery.

 Sachsenwerk G.m.b.H.      Am Ostbahnhof (3)

  The S&chsische Eisenbahnbedarf &
  Maschinenfabrik G.m.b.H. Stendal are
  makers of railway equipment.
 
 - 645 -

  Chemicals and Explosives

 Dynamit A.G.      Klietz  (3)
   N.ar the small sett leinen t of Klietz 10
   miles to the North-east of Stendal is a
   plant which is reported to be under the
   control of a subsidiary of I.G. Farben
   (probably Dynamit A.G.). Its construction
   began some time about 193&, nd it has
   been constantly expanded since, ^he lay-
   out of the plant is so different from
   British practice that it is somewhat
   difficult to interpret, but it seems
   almost certainly to be engaged in the
   manufacture of propellant explosives, and
   probably also of finished powder. Nitro-
   cellulose and diglycoldinitrate manufacture
   appear to take place, but estimates of
   capacity are difficult to make. At a rough
   estimate, the factory should be capable of
   producing up to 20,000 tons of nitro-
   cellulose, and between 5,0u0 and 10,000
   tons of diglycoldinitrate annually.

 

STETTIN (Pomerania)
53° 25' N. 14° 35' E: 630 miles:  (380,000)

 Stettin is at the mouth of the River Oder and is Germany's
largest Baltic port. It is the nearest port to Berlin, which lies
84 miles to the South-west. It has direct rail communications with
Berlin, Frankfurt (Oder), and Danzig, and through the River Oder is
joined up to the main North German inland-waterway system. It plays
an important part in the seaborne supply arrangements for the Eastern
Front.

 The central area of Stettin is a compact mass composed mainly
of dwelling houses and offices. The industrial area extends along
the river from the dock area in the south-eastern quarter of the
city northwards along the left bank to Gutzlow. Kost of the
important industrial plants are in this area.

 The main industry of Stettin is connected with its shipyards.
No large vessels are built here, but there is considerable activity
in the building and fitting-out of submarines, mine sweepers, naval
escort vessels, and tank landing craft. The shipyard area is in
the neighbourhood of Grabow, which is on the left bank of the river
one mile to the North of the main railway bridge. The Vulkan
shipyards have been considerably extended during the war. Opposite
the shipbuilding yards is the Bredow Werder, a large island in the
channel of the Oder, which is in process of being converted into
an industrial area and naval base. At the South end of this island
a large dock basin has been excavated. The port or dock area is on
the right bank of the Oder immediately North of the marshalling yards,
and in the neighbourhood of the docks is a large concentration of
warehouses, timber yards, oil depots, and small factories.
 
- 646 - 
 
 In Pommerensdorf, a southern suburb of Stettin, there are
chemical works and a large electric power station, which are
described below.

An important factory lying outside the general industrial area
is the Stoewer Werke A.G-., which is situated to the West of the town
in the suburb of Westend.

 The outlying district of Pölitz, 8 miles to the North of Stettin,
contains an important synthetic-oil plant and an electric
generating station. These are included with Stettin in the list
below.

 The town of Altdamm, which lies to the South-east of Stettin,
is dealt with separately.

 Transportation

 Port Area      Stettin  (2)
   The port and dock area are opposite the centre
   of the town on the right bank of the Oder.
   There are two harbours with rail sidings which
   lead from the marshalling yards immediately to
   the South East. The Freihafen, one of the docks
   immediately opposite to the city centre, has
   some of the largest dock warehouses in Europe,
   including a large grain elevator. The whole
   dock area, including the island known as the
   Silber-Wiese, at the point where the main
   railway crosses the Oder, is closely built
   with warehouses, timber yards, saw mills, oil
   storage depots, and small factories.

   Stettin is an important transhipment centre
   for the Upper Silesian coal which is conveyed
   in barges down the Oder direct from the
   coalfields.

 Railway Centre     Stettin  (2)
   The main line from Berlin, which continues
   beyond Stettin north-eastwards parallel with
   the Baltic coast, forms a direct route from
   Berlin to Danzig. Other lines radiate from
   Stettin north-westwards to Stralsund, south-
   wards to Küstrin, and northwards via Gollnow
   round the Eastern side of the Stettiner Haff
   to Swinemfinde. Three other minor branch lines
   serve the agricultural districts to the West
   and South-west of the town.

 Marshalling Yards      Stettin  (3)

   The marshalling yard has a capacity for handling
   2500 wagons per 24- hours. It is connected
   with the chief goods station which hamiles
   traffic arriving on the Oder for despatch to
   Berlin, and goods from Berlin and Breslau for
   shipment to the Baltic ports. It is also the
   clearing station for the eastern coastal
   districts of the Baltic.


- 647 -

 Public Utility Services


  power Station      Pommerensdorf (1)
   The Oderkraftwerk thermal power station is
  owned by Märkisches Elektrizitätswerk A.G.
  (MEW) and has an installed capacity of 200 MW,
  It is situated in the Southern suburbs of
  Stettin, near the left bank of the Western
  branch of the Oder. The station is unique
  in its construction. Built shortly before the
  during the war, it is designed to afford the
  greatest possible concealment and protection
  against air attack and is built into the edge
  of a cliff with part of the plant underground.
  The open-air switching station is situated about
  100 yards to the West; several overhead lines
  are connected to it and though their routes
  are not known it is assumed that one at least
  connects to Stettin.

  Power Station     Altdammerstrasse (2)
   This thermal power station is situated in the
  S-E suburbs of Stettin on the river Paraitz, a
  tributary of the Oder; it is owned by the
  Grosskraftwerk Stettin A.G. (controlled by the
  Stettin Corporation), and has an installed
  capacity of 91 MW. Stettin and district
  receive electricity supplies mainly from this
  station via the transmission system of the
  Märkisches Elektrizitätswerk (MEW), which owns
  several generating stations in this area
  including the Oderkraftwerk at Pommerensdorf.
  Districts supplied include Greifenhagen, 12
   miles South; Prenzlau, 30 miles West; and the
  district round the river Randow, 16 miles North.

   An open-air substation connects the station to
  the 100 kV transmission system. Lines at this
  voltage are believed to connect to Pasewalk,
  Stargard, the Oderkraftwerk, and Pölitz.

  Power Stations     Pölitz  (1)
   The two thermal power stations, Pölitz I and II,
  form part of the synthetic-oil plant situated
  about 8 miles North of Stettin; they belong to
  the Hydrierwerke Pölitz A.G. and have a
  combined installed capacity of 300 MW. Pölitz
  I, the most southerly, has an installed capacity
  of 225 MW; Pölitz II, 250'yards to the North,
  was completed in 194-3 and has an installed
  capacity of 75 MW. The estimated requirements
  of the synthetic-oil plant are J00 MW, with an
  annual consumption of about 2 million kWh;
  these are supplied by medium and low voltage
  underground cables. Steamis also supplied to
  the plant.

   A large open-air substation is situated in the
  Western area of the works, to which at least 2
  high-voltage overhead lines are connected;- one
  of these probably connects to Stettin, and the
  other to Steinstrasse.

- 648 -

 Gasworks       Stettin (3)
   The municipal gasworks I are situated, to the
   S. of the town near the left bank of the
   R. Oder, on the main Berlin railway line.
   Gas is bought from the coking plant of the
   Hochofenwerk Lubeck A.G-. at Kratzwiek, but
   most of the supplies are made in the ordinary
   way. In 1936, sales were 800 mill. cu. ft.,
   of which 260 million were purchased.
   Gasworks II are adjoining the Zabelsdorf
   Railway Station to the N. of the town.

 Solid Fuels

 Hedwigshutte       Gotzlow (3)
   The Hedwigshutte KohlenF- & Kokswerke A. G-.
   has a large briquetting plant at Gotzlow
   on the left bank of the Oder, 4 miles
   North-east of Stettin. These works, which
   have their own quay and loading facilities,
   employed seme 900 workers before the war.

 Hochofenwerk      Kratz wieck  (3)
   The coking plant of the Hochofenwerk Lubeck
   A.G-. at Kratzwieck (see also below under Iron
   & Steel)
has 162 ovens and an annual rated
   dry coal capacity of 400,000 tons.

 Liquid Fuels and Substitutes

 Hydrierwerk       Politz (1)
   This important synthetic-oil plant belonging
   to the Hydrierwerk Politz A. G. covers an
   area of approximately three-quarters of a
   square mile. The Bergius process is used,
   and the Pblitz plant has an estimated annual
   capacity of 600,000 tons of oil. The plant
   has its own power supply, which is described
   above under P. U. S. Construction
   of the Politz oil plant began in 1938 and
   oil production commenced in 1940. The plant
   was working to its full capacity for the
   first time in 1943.

 Oil Storage       Stettin (3)
   There are several oil-storage installations
   in the dock area and on the bank of the
   River Parnitz. These are estimated to have
   a storage capacity of approximately 100,000
   tons in total.

- 649 -

 Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys

   Hoohofenwerk      Kratzwieck (2)
  The Hochofenwerk Lübeck A.G., the parent
  works of which are in Lübeck, have a branch
  works in the suburb of Kratzwieck, 4 miles
  North of Stettin, on the left bank of the
   'Oder. The Kratzwieck plant comprises iron
  and steel works, a copper refinery, and a
  coking plant with 162 ovens. The iron and
  steel works have an annual capacity of
  150,000 tons of pigiron, and the copper
  refinery of 3,000 tons of copper per annum.

 Aircraft and Aero-Engines

   Stoewer Werke     Falkenwalderstr. (-)

  A section of the Stoewer Werke A.G., which
  is described below under Engineering and
  Armaments, is reported to be building aero-
  engines of the Jumo 211 type. The report
  has so far remained unconfirmed.

 Shipbuilding

   Stettiner Oderwerke A.G. für Schiff u. Grabow   (1)   Maschinenbau

  These important constructional engineering
  and submarine building works are situated
  on the left bank of the Oder one mile North
  of the town, at the south end of the important
  group of shipbuilding yards and engineering
  works which include the Vulkan yards and
  Gollnow works. The firm has been engaged on
  the building of M-class minesweepers and
  repair and maintenance work on other naval
  units since the war. Submarine building
  was begun late in 1941 when one of 500 tons
  was laid down; the building of these U-boats
  was carried on in 4 open slips, the U-boats
  being concealed in camouflaged cradles. Other
  shipbuilding equipment consists of extensive
  workshops, 6 floating docks weighing from
  700 to 3,000 tons, two floating cranes, ferry
  installations for the production of ocean and
  river craft, passenger and cargo vessels, up to
  4500 tons, ice breakers,and tugs. Steel
  castings, forgings, and boilers are also
  produced. Some 5,000 workers are employed.

- 650 -

 Stettiner Vulkan-Werft A.G.    Bredow  (2)
   The shipbuilding yards of these works lie
   directly north of and adjoining the Stettiner
   Oderwerke, in the centre of the important
   shipbuilding and engineering group on the
   left bank of the Oder, The yards were closed
   by the Versailles Treaty and reopened in 1938,
   Submarine building began in 1942.  500-ton
   submarines were constructed in 4 open slips,
   concealed in camouflage cradles. There are
   11 slipways, from 90 to 680 ft. in length,
   not all of which are in use. There are 2
   floating docks of 150'ft. and 520 ft. in length.
   The yards also build and fit out seagoing and
   river craft, merchant vessels up to 17,000 tons,
   icebreakers, floating docks, tank landing craft.

 Merkurwerft, G.m.b.H.     Grabow  (3)
   The former Merkurwerft G.m.b.H. which adjoins
   the Stettiner Oderwerke to the south is now a
   naval dockyard and is used for the fitting out
   of naval vessels.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Gollnow & Sohn       Stettin  Zullchow (2)         

   J. Gollnow & Sohn are metal construction
   engineers with an output in peacetime of
   2,200 tons of constructional steelwork
   per month. In 1938 a new department was
   opened for the construction of steel pylons.
   This firm had contracts for the reconstruction
   of steel bridges in Russia and Poland. Before
   the war grenade throwers were manufacture for
   the Wehrmacht. The production of these is
   believed to have been discontinued, but the firm
   is probably engaged on other types of armament
   manufacture' Some 3,000 workers are employed.

 Fristen & Rossmann A.G.    Stettin (2)
   This firm, which formerly manufactured sewing
   machines, went into liquidation some years
   before the war. A recent report states that
   their works have now reopened and are
   producing military bicycles and machine guns.
   Some 3,000 workers are said to be employed,
   the majority of whom are women. The firmis
   given under the above title as no details of
   the new owners are available.

- 651 -

Stoewer Werke Falkenwalderstr. (2)

    The important works of the Stoewer Werke
    A.G are in the Western quarter of Stettin
    in the suburb of Westend. The factory is
    divided into two sections. The main plant
    produces motorcycles and A.F.V. s. A
    subsidiary section, which is reported to
    be building aero-engines, is mentioned
    separately above. Some 3,000 workers were
    employed in these works before the war,
    but a recent report states that this figure
    has now been doubled.


Auto Union Altdanmerstr. (-)


    The Auto Union A. Gk , the parent works of
    which are in Chemnitz, are reported to
    have established a large repair shop in
    Stettin, undertaking the repair of motor
    engines, tractors and armoured cars. The
    plant is believed to employ some 350'workers.

 Chemicals and Explosives

   Zellstoffwerke     Odermtode (2)

    The Feldmfthle Papier- & Ze list off werke
    A.G-. have a factory at OdermBnde, 6 miles
    North of Stettin, on the left bank of the
    River Oder. This factory employed some
    3,000 workers before the war and manufactured
    alkali, sulphur trioxide, sulphuric acid,
    superphosphates and cellulose etc. It is
    estimated to have an annual capacity of
    15,000 to 20,000 tons of alkali; 3,000 tons
    of sulphur trioxide, and 3,800 tons of
    sulphuric acid. The company has also a
    branch factory at Hohenkrug, 3 miles to the
    East of Altdanm, which used to employ some
    400 workers.

   Union       Kratzwieck (3)

   Union       Bredow Werde 3)

    The Union Fabrik Chemischer Produkte has
    two plants in the Stettin area. The first
    is in the northern suburb of Kratzwieck,
    the second immediately opposite the ship-
    building yards of the Oderwerke, on the
    Bredow Werde an island in the River Oder,
    This company employed some 300 workers before
    the war, but this nunber is believed to have
    been greatly increased. The Kratzwieck plant
    alone is now estimated to have an annual
    capacity of 3,400 tons of sulphur trioxide
    and 4,000 tons of sulphuric acid.


- 652 -

 Chemischen Fabriken A.G. Pommerensdorf (3)
   The chemical factory of the A.G, der
   Chemischen Produkten-Fabriken manufactures
   superphosphates, acids, and various types
   of fertilisers. In 1928 they had an annual
   capacity of over 20,000 tons of acid.

  Foodstuffs

 Grain Silo       Unterwieck (-)

   On the left bank of the Oder, immediately
   opposite to the docks, there is a grain
   silo with a storage capacity of 43,000 tons,

 Stettiner Oelwerke A.G.     ZÜllchow (-)

 P, J. Stahlberg     Pommerensdorferstr. -)

   The above are two vegetable-oil crushing
   plants and refineries. The Stettiner Oelwerke
   has a capacity of 130,000 tons and Stahlberg
   40,000 tons per annum. The Stahlberg plant
   employed some 30O workers before the war.
   The site of the Stettiner Oelwerke includes
   the plant of the Töpfer's Oelwerke and the
   annual capacity figure of 130,000 tons is
   for both works.



STOCKSTADT (Bavaria)
50° N. 9° E: 420 miles: (7,000)

Stockstadt am Main is 4 miles West of Aschaffenburg. Apart
from a rayon factory, there are no factories of individual importance.


 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper


Zellstoffwerke Stockstadt (3)


   The Aschaffenburger Zellstoffwerke A.G. ,
   the parent works of which are in
   Aschaffenburg, have a large factory in
   Stockstadt producing paper pulp and rayon
   pulp. This concern, which is
   also an important producer of cellulose
   for paper-making has since 19J7 greatly
   extended its pulp for the manufacture of
   viscose rayons,

- 653 -

STOLBERG (Rhineland)
50° 45' N. 6° 15' E:  280 miles: (30,000)

  Stolberg lies 7 miles East of Aachen on a branch railway line
which Joins the main -Cologne-Aachen line one mile North of the
town. It is the centre of a zinc mining district, and the indus-
tries include zinc smelting and non-ferrous metal fabrication, and
a chemical works. The principal factories are mentioned below.

 Transportation

 Railway Repair Shops     Stolberg (3)
   These are medium sized repair shops under-
   taking the repair of goods wagons.

  Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

 Stolberger Zink     Münsterbusch (2)         
 					Binsfeldhammer 2)
         			Birkengang -)

   The Stolberger Zink A.G. für Bergbau &
   Hüttenbetrieb, whose head office is in
   Aachen, own a number of zinc and lead mines
   in the Rhineland, and have their three
   principal smelting works close to Stolberg^
   at Münsterbusch, Binsfeldhammer and Birkengang.
   The Münsterbusch plant has a capacity of
   30,000 tons of zinc, and the Binsfeldhammer
   plant a capacity of 42,000 tons of lead per
   annum. The capacity of the Birkengang plant
   is estimated at 16,000 tons of zinc per annum,
   but the plant is believed to be inactive.
   This concern employed some 6,000 workers
   before the war of whom some 4,000 worked at
   the Stolberg group of factories. There are
   chemical factories connected with these two
   plants, which are mentioned below.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Wilhelm Prym       Zweifallerstr. (2)
   The Wilhelm Prym company is an old established
   firm of brass and copper fabricators. The
   works include a foundry and rolling mills,
   and employed some 2500 workers before the war
   when the principal products were brass and
   copper fittings and semi-finished products.
   The plant has been enlarged in the course
   of the war and is now engaged mainly on the
   production of ammunition and armaments
   components.

- 654 -

  Von Asten und Lynen G-.m.b.H.    Stolberg (3)
 This is a firm of copper and brass fabricators
 and brass founders which normally has a
 similar range of products to the fiim of
 Wilhelm Prym mentioned above.

 Chemicals and Explosives

 Schwefelsaurefabrik     Lälnsterbusch (3)
 						Binsfeldhammer 3)

   The Schwefelsaurefabrik Munsterbusch G-.m.b. H.
   is owned by the Stolberger Zink A. G-. (mentioned
   above under N.-F. M. M. and F.). The chemical
   plants which are operated by this canpany and
   attached to the two Non-Ferrous Metal plants
   (mentioned above), produce sulphur trioxide and
   sulphuric acid. The estimated annual cap-
   acities of the two plants are: Mönsterbusch-
   35,0(30 tons of sulphur trioxide and 42500
   tons of sulphuric acid; Binsf elähammer- 15500
   tons of sulphur trioxide and 19,000 tons of
   sulphuric acid.

 Kali-Chemie       Stolberg (3)
   The, Kali-Chemie A. G-. have a branch factory at
   Stolberg, producing soda ash.

- 655 -

STOLP (Pomerania)
54° 30' N. 17° E: 745 miles: (48,000)

 Stolp is 50 miles West of Danzig on the railway frcm Stettin
to Danzig. It is a junction for many of the coastal settlements
on this stretch of the Baltic. Stolp is principally the marketing
centre for the surrounding agricultural district. It contains
several firns producing agricultural machinery and equipment for
the distilling industries. There are also a number of furniture
factories.

 Transportation
Railway Repair Shops   Stolp (3)
These are small railway repair shops
which undertake the repair of goods
wagons and passenger coaches.
 Engineering and Armaments
 
Gustav Denzer    Stolp (-)
This firm manufactures agricultural
machinery and equipment for the
distilling industries. In peacetime
seme 150'workers are employed.

Vetzki      Stolp (-)

   The Maschinenfabrik Vetzki K.G-. are
   makers of all kinds of agricultural tools
   and implements.



STRALSUND (Pomerania)
54° 20' N. 13° 5' E:  585 miles: (53,000)

 Stralsund is 85 miles North-west of Stettin on the coast
of the Baltic opposite to the island öf Rügen. It is chiefly an
agricultural marketing centre for North-western Poerania. There
are also a number of factories specializing in the canning and
preserving of fish. Stralsund is on the railway line 1 en di ng to
the train-ferry service to Sweden from the island of Rugen.

 Transportation

 Railway Centre      Stralsund (3)
   Three direct railway lines lead from
   Stralsund to Rostock, Neubrandenburg,
   and Stettin respectively. North-
   eastwards the railway crosses by means
   of a bridge to the island of Rugen and
   to Sassnitz, the terminus of a train
   ferry to Trelleborg, which forms an
   important link with Sweden.

- 656 -

  Public Utility Services

 Electric Power Station     Stralsund

   The municipal power station is of the
   thermal type and has a capacity of 30 W.



STRAUBING (Bavaria)
48° 55' N. 12° 35' E: 590 miles:  (28,000)

 Straubing is on the right bank of the Danube, 23 miles East
of Regensburg, and is on the railway line from Regensburg to
Passau and Austria. It is a market for the surrounding agricultural
district. The industries, which include bricks and tiles, the
manufacture of agricultural implements, and brewing, are not of
outstanding importance.



STRIEGAU (Silesia)
50° 55' N. 16° 20' E: 715 miles:    (15,000)

 Striegau is 20 miles South-east of Liegnitz on the railway
from Liegnitz to Neisse and Upper Silesia. The principal activity
of the town is connected with the granite quarries in this
neighbourhood. The other industries, which are on a small scale,
include hosiery, gloves, and furniture manufacture, and a few
small engineering works chiefly making agricultural machinery and
implements.

- 657 -

STUTTGART (Württemberg)
48° 45' N. 9° 10' E: 450 miles: (600,000)

  Stuttgart, the capital of Württemberg, is the most important
industrial town in Southern Germany. It lies in a valley
surrounded by wooded hills which open out in the East into the
valley of the river Neckar, The town has grown in size consider-
ably since the end of the last century, the development being
' due mainly to the engineering industry consisting principally of
light and electrical engineering. Together with the adjoining
suburb of Zuffenhausen, Feuerbach forms one of the chief industria-
lised quarters of the Stuttgart district. The second industrial
area is in Cannstatt and Affinster, which are to the North of the
city centre and on the left bank of the river Neckar, This area
includes an important ball-bearing works, the town's electric
power station, and several precision-engineering works. A third
industrial district is East of the city centre and on the right
bank of the river, extending Southeastward from UntertÖrkheim
up the river valley to Esslingen. The highly important main plant
of the Daimler-Benz concern is in Untertürkheim, which also
contains large marshalling yards and railway-repair shops. Halfway
between Untertürkheim and Esslingen are the "Index” works of
Hahn A Tessky, one of Germany's leading makers of machine tools.
The manufacture of machine tools and measuring instruments is a
highly-developed industry in Stuttgart and also in the neighbouring
settlements of Esslingen, 4 miles to the South-east, It is
characteristic of Stuttgart, as indeed of the whole of Württemberg,
that in normal times industry tends to remain in the hands of a
large number of medium-sized or small firms. This is particularly
the case with machine tools, and it is, therefore, not possible
to include all the numerous firms which in the aggregate make
Stuttgart a vital factor in the German engineering industry,
Stuttgart is an important railway centre and is on the main
routes from the North to Zurich and from Munich to Karlsruhe
and France.

 Transportation

 Railway Centre     Stuttgart   (2)
  The main railway station is situated in the
  centre of the town and is one of the largest
  terminal railway stations in Germaiy. Stuttgart
  lies on two important trunk routes, from
  North Germany to Zurich, and from Munich to
  Karlsruhe and France, Two branch lines lead
  East and West to SchwÄbisch-Gmünd and B&blingen
  respectively, and several minor branches serve
  the neighbouring industrial settlements,
  including Sindelfingen, Kornwestheim and
  Ludwigsburg.

 Marshalling Yards     Untertörkhei (3)

  These marshalling yards are capable of
  handling up to 2,200 wagons per 24 hours.

 Goods Yards   Stuttgart   (3)

  The principal goods yards occupy a
  area to the North-east of the main
  station and have extensive storage facilities.

- 658 -


 Goods Yards      Bad Canstatt  (3)
  Extensive goods yards lie on the Western
  side of the large railway-repair shops
  South of the suburban station of Bad
  Cannstatt on the right bank of the Neckar.

 Railway Repair Shops   Stuttgart   (2)
  There are railway-repair shops at Bad
  Cannstatt and Stuttgart-Nord. At Bad
  Cannstatt the repair of all kinds of
  rolling stock, including passenger
  coaches, is undertaken, and at Stuttgart-
  Nord the repair of goods wagons. Some
  2,000 workers are employed in Bad Caristatt
  and 500 in Stuttgart-Nord repair shops
  alone. In addition to the above there are
  also repair shops employing some 900
  workers at Esslingen.

 Public Utility Services

 Power Station     Stuttgart   (2)
  This thermal power station is situated
  in Münster, a northern suburb of Cannstatt.
  It is owned by the Stuttgart Corporation
  and has an installed capacity of 87 MW. In
  addition to the general town supply, power
  is delivered for railway traction. There
  are no important long-distance supplies'
  An adjacent 6/110 kV substation is owned by
  Elektrizitäts-Versorgung Württemberg A.G.
  and provides supplies for traction locally
  and via a 110-kV transmission line through
  Plochingen to Pasing to serve the electrified
  Stuttgart-Ulm-Augsburg-Munich railway line
  (single-phase circuit).
  A substation for 3/10 kV transmits supplies
  locally. Medium-voltage lines connect to
  Degerloch and Obertürkheim.

 Power Station     Marbach  (2)
  The Marbach plant consists- of a large thermal
  station, begun in 1938 and completed since the
  outbreak of war, and a small hydro station,
  and has an installed capacity of 108 MW. It
  is situated on the river Neckar about 10 miles
  North of Stuttgart and this relatively remote
  location was probably chosen mainly as an
  air-raid precaution. It is believed that
  practically the whole electrical output is
  supplied to the grid at the 220-kV Hoheneck
  substation and the 110-kV Obertürkheim sub-
  station from whence a part is transmitted to
  Stuttgart. The small hydro station has an
  installed capacity of 3 MW.
  An outdoor substation contains 4 double-circuit
  110-kV lines, of which one, possibly two,
  connects to Obertüikheim and two to Hoheneck.

- 659 -

   Substation      Hoheneck  (2)
    This important substation is situated 2
   miles South-west of the Harbach generating
    station. It is being extended and
    identification is therefore uncertain. The
    station is on the 220-kV (planned 380—kV)
    long-distance line which links the water-
    power stations of the mountainous regions
    on the southern frontiers of Germany with
    the Ruhr industrial area.
    There are three adjoining sections for
    220 kVF 110 kV and 60 kV respectively.
    Each section has duplicate busbars.
    Two 380/220-kV circuits connect to Rheinau
    and two to Herbertingen.
    One 220-kV circuit connects to Ellwangen.
    Two (possibly) 110-kV circuits connect to
    Pforzheim and two (possibly)  to Heilbronn.
    Two double 110-kV circuits are under
    construction to Haibach station.
    Two 60-kV circuits go to Heilbronn, two to
    Pleideslheim, and one to Enzberg.
    It is believed that there are transformers
    for voltages lower than 60 kV.

   Gas Works       Stuttgart   (3)
    The municipal ^is works made 3,100 million
    cubic feet of gas in 1936. Supplies are
    given to a large number of localities
    around Stuttgart.

 Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

   Leichtmetallbau G.m.b.H.   Feuerbach' Siemensstr.  (3)

    The Leichtmetallbau G.m.b.H. manufacture
    fuel and oil containers, pilots seats,
    and other light-metal components and
    accessories for aircraft.

   Heinrich Ritter'     Esslingen  Ulmers tr.  (3)       

    Before the war this firm manufactured a
    variety of light-metal products. It is
    now engaged on the manufacture of light-
    metal aircraft components of unspecified
    type, but is believed to,supply the
    Messerschnitt and Focke-Wulf companies.

   Gebrüder Heller Maschinenfabrik Nurtingen    (3)
    The factory is reported to be producing
    hand drills ranging from 1 mn. to 10 cm. in
    diameter, automatic lathes of a new model
    used for the manufacture of shells and
    aerial bombs, planing machines, circular
    saws, emery grinding molds, milling machines,
    and hydraulic units for other machine tools
    were also produced. About 400 workers are
    believed to be employed.


- 660 -

 Aircraft and Aero-Engines

   Albert Hirth A.G.    Zuffenhausen (3)
    The Zuffenhausen worts of this company is
    mainly engaged on experimental wort, which
    is carried out on behalf of its holding
    company, the Heinkel aircraft concern. The
    research and experimental work is chiefly
    connected with the development of low-
    powered aero-engines, aero-engine components,
    and, in particular, crankshafts.
    The Hirth Motoren G.m.b.H. occupies the
    same site, and works.in close co-operation
    with the aoove firm. The ground reports
    suggest that since early 194J0 approximately
    1,000 workers have been employed at the
    Zuffenhausen factory, and there are indications
    that, in addition to research and experimental
    work, a small range of aero-engine components
    manufactured here.

   Elektronmetall G.m.b.H'    Bad Cannstatt (3)
    This firm specialises in the manufacture of
    pistons and piston rings, brakes, and shock
    absorbers for the aircraft industry. Other
    products include light-metal components
    for aircraft instruments, particularly radio
    equipment.

   Leichtmetallbau G.m.b.H.    Bad Cannstatt (3)
    It is believed that this firm employs
    3/400 workers on the manufacture of air-
    craft components, in particular shock
    absorbers and components for aircraft
    undercarriages, brakes, and other aircraft
    equipment.

   J.Eberspächer      Esslingen   (3)    I
    This factory has been considerably enlarged
    since 1939, and has acquired at least one
    of the neighbouring factory sites, apait
    frcm erecting two new workshops adjacent
    to its old premises. It is believed to be
    engaged mainly on the manufacture of air-
    craft components and cylinder-baffling
    silencers, air filters, and other aero-engine
    components. Other products of the firm are
    components for flame throwers, and reports
    suggest that a number of other firms in
    Esslingen supply Eberspächer with major and
    minor components for flame throwers,
    indicating that assembly of flame throwers
    is likely to be undertaken by them.

- 661 -

   Daimler-Benz A.G.     UntertÜrkheim (1)
    The principal pre-war activity of this
    company was the manufacture of motor vehicles,
    and it is believed that the major part
    of the very extensive old Daimler-Benz works
    at Untertürkheimis still employed on work
    connected with the ijiotor-vehicle industry.
    This aspect of the Daimler-Benz production
    is dealt with below, under "Engineering and
    Armaments", and the following relates
    exclusively to those pai'ts of the works
    which are believed to be engaged on aero-
    engine work. For several years prior to the war the Daimler-
    Benz company undertook the development of
    aero-engines, and prototypes were built and
    tested at this works. It is thought that up
    to 1939 no large-scale production of aero-
    engines was undertaken, except at the branch
    factories at Genshagen and Marienfelde, near
    Berlin. Reports suggest that these two
    factories were supplied with components
    from Untertürkheim. It is not definitely
    known when the complete construction of aero-
    engines at UntertÜrkheim commenced, but it
    seems probable that it was during the early
    part of 1942. Up to the end of that year
    aero-engines erected at Untertürkheim were
    transported to Sindelfingen for testing,
    but since then the UntertÜrkheim works has
    been very greatly extended, and it is clear
    from reconnaissance photographs that most of
    the sections are connected with the production
    of aero-engines, which is now taking place
    at Stuttgart on a large scale. Several series
    of engine test-beds have been erected, and
    it is believed that UntertÜrkheim now represents
    one of the principal production centres for
    Daimler-Benz engines.

 Engineering and Armaments

   Daimler-Benz A.G.     UntertÜrkheim (1)
    Owing to its interests in other industries
    (particularly the aero-engine industry - see
    aoove) the Daimler-Benz company is the
    largest motor-vehicle concern in Germany.
    In terms of output the UntertÜrkheim plant
    is second only to Opel, its 1938 production
    figures being 20,000 passenger cars and
    6,000 commercial .vehicles. There is reason
    to believe that the manufacture of commercial
    vehicles, particularly lorries, has increased
    considerably in the course of the war, and
    that there has been a corresponding decline
    in the output of cars, production of which
    is confined mainly to military types. Several
    sections of the UntertÜrkheim plant are
    engaged on the manufacture of components for
    motor vehicles, which are partly supplied to

- 662 -

    their branch works at Gaggenau and
    Sindelfingen. No definite information
    regarding the number of workers at
    present employed at Untertürkheimis
    available, but ground reports suggest
    that the total is approximately 20,000,
    including the very large number of
    workers employed in the aero-engine
    sections described above (under " Aircraft
    and Aero-Engines ").

   Robert Bosch A.G.     a) Feuerbach (1+)
        				b) Stuttgart-Militär Str. 1)          

    The principal works of this firmis at
    Feuerbach, a suburb of Stuttgart. A
    second works in this area is in the
    middle of Stuttgart (west of the main
    railway station) but although it has
    been repeatedly extended since 1939 it
    is not as important as the Feuerbach
    works.
    The outstanding value of the Bosch works
    to the German armament industry is their
    very large output of fuel injection
    pumps, magnetos, sparking plugs, and
    batteries, as well as the usual Bosch
    range of electrical accessories for
    internal combustion engines. In addition
    the Feuerbach and Stuttgart works make
    a wide range of other electrical
    appliances such as components for search-
    lights, head-lamps,etc., but there are,
    of course, only of secondary importance.
    Bosch operate a subsidiary factory at
    Klein-Machnow near and also an affiliated
    factory in G-erman occupied territory but
    it is estimated that the Stuttgart
    factories of Bosch still account for more
    than half of Germany's total requirements
    of fuel injection pumps, magnetos, sparking
    plugs, and other electrical accessories
    for internal combustion engines.
    It is estimated that the Feuerbach works
    employs some 20,000 workers and that a
    further 10,010 hands are engaged at Stuttgart-
    Militär Str.

   Zeiss Ikon (Contessa)
   Domhalderstr. (2)
    The Stuttgart works of the Zeiss Ikon A.G.
    of Dresdeh are known as the Contessa Werke.
    This branch specialises in the manufacture
    of cameras and photographic appliances of
    all kinds. It is now believed that their
    range of products has been widened to include
    the grinding and polishing of optical lenses
    and a wide range of optical instruments.
    Some 2,000 workers were reported to be em-
    ployed in 1942.     
    
- 663 -

   Fortuna Werke    Prägstr,  (3)
    The Fortuna Werke Spezialmaschinen-
    fabrik A. G-., whose works are in Bad
    Cannstatt, are makers of sawing, planing
    and grinding machines (including
    universal grinders, internal grinders,
    ball and race grinders), and also of
    measuring apparatus. They employed
    some 950'workers in 1939.

   H. Längerer     Stuttgart  (3)

    This firm manufactures radiators,
    including aircraft radiators, and
    was formerly known as Kdhlerfabrik
    Längerer & Reich A.G-.

   Adolf Zaiser     Bahnhof str.  (3)
    The Adolf Zaiser Maschinenfabrik G-.m.b.H.
    employed some 400 workers before the war,
    and were makers of elevators and framed
    steel structures.

   Adolf Friz G-.m.b.H.   Haldenstr.   (3)
    The firm of Adolf Friz G-.m.b.H., whose
    works are in Cannstatt, produced machinery
    for the woodworking industry before the
    war but are reported now to be making the
    moveable parts of watertight compartments
    for submarines on a large scale and are
    also said to be assembling steering-gear
    components. The reports suggest that some
    300 workers were employed in 1943.

   J.C.Eckardt A.G-.    Pragstr.   (3)
   Carl Mahr      Plichingerstr.  3)
   Julius Ortlieb    Mettingenstr. 3)
    The J.C.Eckardt A.G-., whose works are in
    Bad Cannstatt, are makers of pressure
    gauges for use in submarines, manometers
    and pressure indicators, and thermometers
    for use in aircraft. Before the war they
    employed some 200 workers. The two other
    firms mentioned above, whose works are
    both in Esslingen, have a similar range of
    products and are approximately equal in
    size.

- 664 -

   Hänni & Co, G.m.b.H.   Olgastr.  (3)

   Wizemenn & Co.    Im Schwenkrain 3)

    These two firms, whose works are in Bad
    Cannstatt, are makers of manometers,
    pressure indicators and gauges, and
    measuring instruments of all kinds,
    principally for use in aircraft and
    submarines.

   G.Iufft      Neue V/einsteige (3)
    The G.Lufft Metallbärometerfabrik G.m.b.H.
    make altimeters, recording barometers, and
    other meteorological instruments.

   C.Haushann      Borsigstr.  (3)

   R.Stahl      Ulmerstr.  3)

    The above two firms are makers of lifts,
    cranes, weighbridges, escalators and
    bucket elevators. They are among the
    leading German firms in this branch.

   Wilhelm Grupp     Hofenerstr.   (3)
    The Wilhelm Grupp Eisengiesserei G.m.b.H.
    have an iron foundry in Bad Cannstatt and
    are reported to siipply castings to the
    Bosch concern.

   Kolbenbolzen Fabrik    Rotebühlstr. (3)
    The Süddeutsche Kolbenbolzen Fabrik
    G.m.b.H, are believed to employ some 800
    workers and to manufacture piston rings
    for internal combustion engines. They
    are important suppliers of these products
    to the aero-engine industry.

   Alfred Knecht     Haldenstr.   (3)
    This firm, whose works are in Bad Cannstatt,
    manufactures small components for motor
    engines and specialise in petrol filters.

   Kreidler's Metall- & Drahtwerke Zuffenhausen (3)
    This is the parent works of Kreidler's Metall-
    & Drahtwerke G.m.b.H., who are important
    producers of pressed and drawn rods, bars and
    sections in light and heavy metals as well
    as of profiles infall foims.


- 665 -

   G.Boley      Mettingerstr. (3)
    Th,i fj-m makes lathes and grinding machine
    tods and. prior to the war employed some
    550'workers.

   jjtena      Cannstatt   (1)
    The Norma Compagnie G.m.b.H., which is
    owed and operated by the Vereinigte
    Kugellagerfabrik A.G., is the largest
    German ball-bearing works outside
    Schweinfurt. These works specialise in
    the production of the smaller sixes of
    hall bearings, such as are used in peace-
    time in textile machinery, and particularly
    in small precision bearings for magnetos,
    for which the Karma is the principal
    supplier to the Bosch works. This factory
    is also responsible for a large proportion
    o the bearings used in aircraft controls,
    predictors and other instruments. The
    Norma plant has been greatly extended in
    recent years. Several thousand workers
    were employed in 1943.

   Esslinger Maschinenfabrik   Esslingen   (1)
    The Esslinger Maschinenfabrik A.G. are
    important makers of locomotives, including
    main-line locomotives (of Which their out-
    put has been reported, as 15 per month),
    stationary steam engines, boilers, pumps,
    compressors, refrigeration plant, tank
    wagons, and constructional steel products.
    They employed some 3,000 workers before
    the war and it is believed that this number
    has now increased. Ground intelligence
    suggests that a number of new departments
    were opened in the course of 1942 and are
    specialising in the manufacture of components
    for the standard—type locomotive.
    The works occupy a large area situated
    between the railway line and the right bank
    of the river Neckar, midway between Unter-
    tttrkheim and Esslingen.

   A.E.G.      Bad Cannstatt (3)

    The Stuttgart works of the A.E.G. produce
    mainly elect ideal tools, generators for
    water turbines, electrical motors of all
    types, switchboard gear and transformers.

   Fr. Besser Maschinenfabrik # Olgastr.    (3)
    The Fr. Besser Maschinenfabrik A.G., whose
    works are in Bad Cannstatt, are makers in
    peacetime of automatic packing, fol di ng,
    weighing and labelling machines. A large
    proportion of their machines were exported.

- 666 -


  Fr.Besser Maschnine nfabri k Glgastr. (3)

  Tbe Fr. Besser Hase binenfabrik XG.,
  whose works are in Bad ^anstatt, are
  makers in peacetime of automatic
  packing, folding, weighing and labelling
  machines. A large proportion of their
  machines were exported. Before the war
  they employed some 800 workers. It has
  been reported that the factory is now-
  engaged on the manufacture of components
  for submarine and tank eng-i nes.

 "Wagner & Eisenmann     Ess"! i n gerat r.(3)

  The factory of this firmis in Obertfirkheim
  and prior to the war made boilers for steam
  engines and locomotives. It is now re par-ted
  that they are concentrating on plate for
  armoured vehicles and are working in
  conjunction with the Daimler-Benz concern.

 M, St reic her     linderst r (3)
        Bad Cannstatt


  This firm manufactures municipal vehicles,
   including road-sweeping, washing and
   sprinkling machines, and refuse-collecting
   vehicles.


  Mahle K.G. a)Bad Cannstatt (2)
b) Waiblingen 3)
c) Fellbach 3)

  The Mahle K. G., with which the Stuttgart
   branch of the Elektronmetall G.mb.H is
   amalgamated, are among the leading German
   makers of under-carriages, brakes, wheels,
   pi stems and other components for aircraft
   and aero-engines. They are believed to
   supply a large percentage of the total
   German requirements. Other products made
   by this film on a large scale are bomb
   components, fuze bodies, components for
   incendiary projectiles etc. Some 5,000
   workers are engaged in the above three
   plants. The factories at Yifaihlingen and
   Fellbach have both been constructed since
   the outbreak of war, and in July 1943 "the
   Waiblingen works were still in course of
   erection.

  Hahn & Tessky     Esslingen (1)
        Stuttgart 3)

  The Hahn Ä Tessky Indexwerke K.G. are among
   the Tending German makers ctf machine tools,
   and are in partimflar the leading German
   makers of capstans. Their range of other
   machine tools include lathes, drills, presses,
   boring and grinding machines, (including
   deep-hole borers), lapping machines, and

- 666a -

    grinders, milling and thread-cutting
    machines, and jigs of all kinds. Other
    specialities are high-speed automatic
    screw machines used in the production
    of certain components for aircraft, tanks,
    bomb fuzes, guns, and radio equipment.
    Approximately 2,000 were employed at the
    Esslingen plant before the war but ground
    intelligence suggests that the number has
    risen to over 3,000 by mid-1943. Hahn &
    Tessky also have a small branch assembly
    woik:s in the centre of Stuttgart, adjacent
    to their administrative offices. Sane
    500-600 workers are believed to be employed
    at the Stuttgart works,

   Robert Schenck     Stuttgart   (-)

    The Robert Schenck Wagenfabrik manufactures
    trailer vehicles and is one of the smaller
    firms in Germany for this type of vehicle.

 Chemicals and Explosives

   Hauff       Feuerbach  Adolf Hitler Str. (3)        

    The Hauff A.G. manufacture photographic films,
    chemicals and dyestuffs. Some 1,300 workers'
    were employed in 1939.

 Leather

   Mercedes      Bad Cannstatt  Friedrich Ettwein Str. (3)        
    The Mercedes Schuhfabrik A.G. are one of the
    leading boot and shoe manufacturers. They
    employed some 2,000 workers before the war
    and in 1942 they were reported to be producing
    1500 pairs of military boots daily, in
    addition to an output of 1,100 pairs for
    civilian requirements. Reports suggest that
    extensive use is being made of synthetic
    materials. The works was reported in 1943
    to be working to full capacity.

 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

   Rohtex A.G. für Textilrohstoffe Untertürkheim (3)
    Reports suggest that a large stock of
    textile raw materials are stored here.


- 667 -


SUHL (Saxony)
50° 35' N. 10° 40' E: 475 miles: (23500)

  Suhl lies in the Thüringer Wald, and the railway line between
Gotha and Coburg passes through it. Before the war, the main industry
of the town was the manufacture of small arms and bicycles and bicycle
components. Today, production of small arms has largely increased,
and the town is now an important source of supply to the armed forces
of rifles, pistols, and machine guns. It is probable that the
manufacture of bicycles etc. has practically ceased.

 Transportation

  Railway Repair Shops    Suhl   (3)
   These are medium-sized repair shops undertaking
   the repair of goods wagons.

  Public Utility Services

  Gasworks      Suhl   (3)
   The gasworks of the Gasversorgung Thür. Wald
   G.m.b.H. made 106 million cubic feet of gas
   in 1936.

  Engineering and Armaments

  Haenel       Suhl   (2)
   The G. J. Haenel Waffenwerk are makers of
   machine-pistols, rifles and other types of
   automatic weapons. They are reported to
   have a weekly output of 700 machine-pistols and
   250'rifles, and to employ some 4,000 workers.

  Gustloffwerke      Suhl   (2)
   The Berlin-Suhl er Waffen- & Fahrzeugwerke
   (Gustloffwerke) are one of the largest of
   the small-arms manufacturers in Suhl. This
   company has three factories. The first is
   2 miles North of the town, the second mid-way
   between Suhl and the small village of
   Heinrichs, 2 miles to the West, and the third
   in Heinrichs itself. Each of these three
   plants employs several hundred workers on
   the manufacture of light and heavy machine
   guns, rifles, pistols, and small-arms ammunition.
   The company has its parent works and head
   office at Weimar.

- 668 -


  Sauer & Sohn      Suhl   (2)
   The firm of J.L. Sauer & Sohn has a
   similar range of products to the
   Gustloffwerke mentioned above, and
   is reported to have a weekly output
   of 750 machine-pistols. Some 4,000
   workers are reported to be employed.

  Ammunition Factory     Suhl   (-)

   It is reported that a new underground
   ammunition factory, probably a shell-filling
   depot, has been built to the North-east
   of Suhl railway station. Some 2500
   workers are said to be employed,

  Krieg hoff       Suhl   (3)
   In 1942 the firm of Heinrich Krieghoff
   was reported to be employing some 1 ,200
   workers and to be producing machine
   guns and pistols.


GreifeIt & Co. Lauwetter 2)

Franken & Lünenschloss Mühlplatz 2)

Dornheim A.G. Suhl 2)

Ernst Kerner & Co. Lutterothstr 2)

Stotz ä Goessel Lutterothstr 2)


     The above are five of the larger of
     many firms in the Suhl area producing
     small arms, including rifles, pistols,
     and machine guns. It is believed that
     several hundred workers are employed by
     each firm.

- 669 -

SWINEMÜNDE (Pomerania)
53° 55' N. 14° 15' E:   625 miles: (27,000)

   Swinemünde is 30 miles North of Stettin on the isthmus between
  the Baltic and the Stettiner Haff, a large lagoon at the mouth of the
  River Oder. It is directly connected by rail with Stralsund and with
  Anklam, and a third line leads from Swinemünde round the Eastern side
  of the Haff to Stettin. In peacetime Swinemünde is a holiday resort


  and a fishing port, but since the war it has attained considerable
  importance as an auxiliary naval and seaplane base, and two new
  shipbuilding yards which are now in full operation are building large
  numbers of armed drifters and other small naval craft.

 Transportation

   Port Area      Swinemünde (3)
     The port area lies to the South of the
     town. There are three main docks known as
     the Winterhafen, Kahnhafen, and Kohlenhafen.
     A petrol depot, the small municipal gasworks,
     a seaplane wharf, and barracks lie in the
     South-western corner of the port area.

   Liquid Fuels and Substitutes

   Oil Storage       Swinemünde (3)
     The oil-storage tanks, of which there are
     several in the port and in the town itself,
     are reported to have a total storage capacity
     of 104,000 tons.

   Aircraft and Aero-Engines

   Seaplane Base      Swinemünde  (3)
     A seaplane base and an adjacent aerodrome are
     on the Eastern bank of the River Swine to the
     South of the town. There is also a small
     seaplane wharf in the extreme South West
     corner of the main port area.

 Shipbuilding

   Novenhaken       Swinemünde (3)
     The Swinemünde shipbuilding yards are known
     as Movenhaken-Ost and Movenhaken-West. The
     first of these yards is on the right bank
     of the River Swine opposite the port area.
     The second yard includes a large area of land
     also on the right bank of the River Swine
     between the aerodrome and the river. This
     area appears to have been reclaimed and well
     camouflaged. In 1942 the yards began
     constructing large numbers of armed drifters.
     These are of typical fishing-boat design and
     each boat mounts two guns of 75 nan. aⁿa 20 mm,
     (or 37 mm.) respectively. In 1943 21 drifters
     had been completed and 18 were on the slips.

- 670 -

     TABABZ (Thuringia)
     See Waltershausen


TEICHWOLFRAMSDORF (Thuringia)
50° 14.5' N. 12° 15' E: 540 miles: (2,000)

    Teichwolframsdorf is 5 miles South-west of Werdau (which is in
  Saxony)' Apart from a large spinning mill, there is no industrial
  development.

 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

Windisch      Teichwolframsdorf (3)
    The C.F. Windisch A.G. are cotton spinners
    who are reported to have taken over the
    production quotas of several other textile
    mills which have been closed down during
    the war. In October 1942 the number of
    workers employed at these works was stated
    to be 3,200, chiefly women, although in
    1938 only 800 workers were employed.
 

TENINGEN (Baden)
45° 15' N. 7° 55' E: 425 miles: (2,500)

    Teningen is 4 miles North of Freiburg on the main railway
  between Karlsruhe and Freiburg. The only industry of importance
  in Teningen is the large aluminium plant.


   Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication


Tscheulin G.nub.H.     Teningen   (3)
    The Aluminium Werk Tscheulin G.m.b.H.
    are manufacturers of aluminium tubes and
    special aluminium fbil for radio
    condensers. The number of workers
    employed has been reported to exceed one
    thousand.
 

THALE (Province Saxony)
31° 45' N. 11° 5' E: 480 miles:  (14,000)

    Thale is 5 miles South-west of Quedlinburg on a branch railway
  leading to Blankenburg. It is a tourist resort at the Eastern end
  of the Harz Mountains and at the entrance to the Bodethal. The only
  industry of note is the large iron and steel works.

- 671 -

  Iron, Steel and Ferro-alloys

   Eisenhüttenwerk Thale A.G.   Thale (2)

  The Eisenhüttenwerk Thale A.G. are old-
  established iron and steel works which in
  193^ celebrated the 250th anniversary of
  their foundation. The works are in the
  southern quarter of the town at the entrance
  to the narrow gorge of the Bode valley.
  They include three open-hearth and two
  electric annealing furnaces, sheet-metal and
  cold-rolling mills, an iron foundry, and
  welding plant. In peacetime the products
  included sheet metal, cast-iron enamelled ware,
  and containers of all kinds for the chemical,
  brewing and distilling industries. They claim
  to be one of the largest producers of
  enamelled ware in Europe. These works are now
  reported to be turning out torpedo components,
  buoys and floats for mine sweeping and
  barrage nets, and steel components for con-
  tact mines. Some 4,000 workers were employed
  before the war.




TILSIT (Last Prussia)
55° 5' N. 21° 55' E: 945 miles: (58,000)

  Tilsit, on the River Memel, lies on the borders of East
  Prussia and the Memel territory. It is the most northerly town
  in Germany and is the marketing centre of an important
  agricultural district. Tilsit lies on the railway line from
  Insterburg to Memel which crosses the River Memel at Tilsit,
  but which is of no target priority. Amongst other food products
  it is noted for Tilsiter cheese. There is a considerable timber
  industry and the only important single factory in Tilsit is
  the Zellst off-Fabrik of the Waldhof concern'. There is a second
  plant of this firm at Ragnit which lies six miles South-east of
  Tilsit.

 Chemicals and Explosives

   Zellstoff-Fabrik Waldhof A. G.   1) Tilsit   (3)
									2)	Ragnitz  (-)

   1) The Tilsit factory of the Ze 11 st off-Fabrik Waldhof
  A.G. of Mannheimis an important producer of
  sulphuric acid. The plant also produces sulphur
  dioxide for sulphite pulp. In 1928 the annual
  capacity of sulphuric acid (100 per cent, acid)
  was given as “large, - over 20,000 l ² tons”.

   2) A second plant of this firmis situated at
  Ragnitz, 6 miles South-east of Tilsit, but there
  is no information as to its capacity, though it
  is known to be smaller than the Tilsit works.

- 672 -

TODTNAU (Baden)
47° 50' N. 7° 55' E: 440 miles: (2500)

    Todtnau is 15 miles South-east of Freiburg in the southern area
  of the Black Forest. In peacetime the manufacture of brooms is a
  speciality of the town. A recent report suggests that a new
  explosives factory has been erected in the vicinity of Todtnau.

 Chemicals and Explosives

    Hermann Gering     Todtnau   (-)

     A recent report states that a new
     explosives factory has been erected
     by the Hermann Göring concern in the
     vicinity of Todtnau. The works, which
     are stated to be well camouflaged, are
     reported to employ some 2,900 workers.



TORGAU (province Saxony)
51° 35' N. 13° E:   565 miles:  (15,000)

    Torgau, on the River Elbe, is on the railway from Leipzig to
  Cottbus. It is a junction for a branch connecting with the main
  Leipzig-Berlin line. In peacetime Torgau is mainly an agricultural
  marketing centre. In addition to the agricultural-machinery factory
  there is a snail glassworks. In Elsnig, a small town 5 miles North-
  west of Torgau, there is an important branch of the WASAG explosives
  concern.

 Engineering and Armaments

    Wilhelm Stoll      Torgau  ()

     The Wilhelm Stoll Maschinenfabrik made
     agricultural tools and implements. Some
     500 workers were.employed before the war.

 Chemicals and Explosives

    WASAG        Elsnig  (3)

     The Westf&lisch-Annhaltische Sprengstoff
     A.G. have an important factory in Elsnig,
     This plant has an estimated annual capacity
     of 32,000 tons of sulphuric add. A recent
     report states that approximately 500 tons
     of T. N. T. are produced monthly. The Elsnig
     works have presumably replaced the plant at
     Reinsdorf.

- 673 -

TREBBIN (Brandenburg)
52° 15' N. 13° 15' E: 570 miles: (4,000)

  Trebbin is 20 miles South of Berlin on the railway to Leipzig,
 In peacetime it is a small market-gardening centre. Its present
 industrial significance is due to the erection of a new aircraft
 factory, which is mentioned below.

 Aircraft and Aero-Engines

  Aircraft Factory     Trebbin   (-)

  Several recent reports state that a new
  aircraft factory has been erected in the
  vicinity of Trebbin. It is said to be in
  the pine woods to the East of the town and
  to employ some 4,000 workers. No
  satisfactory confirmation of the reports
  has as yet been received.



TRIER (Rhineland)
49° 45' N. 6° 40' E: 320 miles: (80,000)

  Trier is on the River Mosel close to the border of Luxembourg,
 and on the railway which follows the Mosel valley from Koblenz
 to Metz. It is an important garrison and army training centre, and
 there are several large barracks, mostly grouped in the North-
 eastern Quarter of the town. Trier is a market centre for the wine-
 growing district of the Mosel valley. Apart from the large railway-
 repair shops, the only industries are a few small engineering plants.
 A large engineering works is located in the small town of Konz-
 Karthaus, 4 miles South-west of Trier.

 Transportation
 
  Railway Repair Shops     Trier  (2)
  These large railway workshops are in the
  southern quarter of the town on the left
  bank of the River Mosel. Some 1 ,J00
  workers are employed on the repair and
  maintenance of locomotives, passenger
  coaches and goods wagons. This area also
  includes marshalling yards and goods
  sidings.

  Public Utility Services
  
  Power station      Trier  (3)

  The thermal power station is owned by
  the R.W.E.; in 194-1 its installed
  capacity was reported to be 35 Mff.
  
  Gasworks       Trier  (3 )

  The municipal gasworks in Trier made
  155 million cubic feet of gas in 1937.

- 674 -

   Engineering and Armaments


   Zettelmeyer       Konz-Karthaus (3)
     The engineering works of Hubert Zettelmeyer
    are in Konz-Karthaus, 4 miles South-west of.
    Trier, which forms part of the municipal area.
    A recent report states that more than
    1,000 workers are now employed. These
    works manufacture gun tractors and tractors
    for agricultural purposes, most of these
    being powered by diesel engines of the 4“
    cylinder type.



TROSTBERG (Bavaria)
48° 5' N. 12° 35' E:   610 miles: (3500)

   Trostberg is 20 miles North-east of Rosenheim and 10 miles
   North of the Chiemsee. It is on a branch railway which runs from
   Traunstein on the main Rosenheim-Salzburg line to Mühldorf on the
   river Inn. Trostberg is important as the site of the chemical
   works of the Bayerische Stickstoffwerke A, G It is on the river
   Alz, whichis utilised for part of the Inn-Alz l^ydro-electric scheme.

 Public Utility Services

   Inn-Alz Hydro Scheme    Trostberg  (2)
     The Inn-Alz hydro-electric scheme includes
    four stations along the valley of the River
    Inn, which are dealt with under the heading
    "Mühldorf“ , and four stations along the
    valley of the River Alz, a tributary of the
    Inn, which are as follows: Trostberg (2MlQ,
    Tacherting (8 MA'), Margarethenberg (1F W),
    and Holzfeld (35 W). Trostberg and Tacherting
    are owned by Bayerische Stickstoffwerke A.G. ;
    Margarethenberg by Bayerische Kraftwerke A. G. ;
    and Holzfeld by Alzwerke G.m.b.H. , Munich.
    These stations utilise the water power of
    the River Alz along a 20-mile stretch from
    Trostberg to Holzfeld near the influx of the
    Alz into the Inn. A diversionary canal 5
     miles in length is cut from near Margarethenberg
    to Holzfeld. These power stations serve the
    various carb ide/cyanamide plants in this area.
    The Holzfeld station serves the plant at
    Burghausen, which is described under the
    latter heading, and the plant at Steiner am
    Hart, which is described under the heading
    “Mühldorf“. The Margarethenberg station
    serves the Steiner am Hart and Trostberg
    plants. The Tacherting and Trostberg
    stations serve the plants at Schälchen and
    Trostberg, The stations are interconnected
    by a high-voltage transmission network.
 
- 675 -

 Chemicals and Explosives


 Stickstoffwerke      Trostberg (3)

 Stickstoffwerke      Schälchen 3)
   The Trostberg plant of the Bayerische
   Stickstoffwerke A.G-. produces, in
   conJunction.with the Piesteritz works
   of this concern, 125,000 tons of nitrogen
   annually. Calcium cyanamide is also
   produced, and in 1937 their output of
   this chemical was 30,000 tons. Formerly
   some 600 workers were employed in the
   Trostberg plant, but this number has
   probably been increased. The Schälchen
   plant, which is at Tacherting 4 miles
   North of Trostberg, produces calcium
   carbide for supply to the Trostberg
   factory.


TÜBINGEN (Württemberg)
48° 30' N. 9° 5' E: 460 miles:  (30,000)

 T&bingen is on a branch railway line 20 miles South of
Stuttgart. The town, which lies on either side of the river
Neckar, is a marketing centre for the surrounding fruit-growing
and agricultural district. Apart from an electrical-engineering
firm, the remaining industries, which include textiles, furniture,
and surgical instruments, are on a small scale.
 
 Transportation
 
 Railway Repair Shops    Tübingen   (3)
   These are medium-si zed railway workshops
   undertaking the repair and maintenance of
   goods wagons.
 
 Engineering and Armaments
 
 Himmelwerk       Tübingen   (3)
   The Himmelwerk A.G-. are makers of electric
   motors of small horse-power, particularly
   for driving machine tools. The plant has
   been extended during the war, and it is now
   reported that the number of workers is
   approximately 1,000.

- 676 -

TUTTLINGEN (Württemberg)
48° N. 8° 50' E: 470 miles:  (30,000)

   Tuttlingen is in the valley of the upper Danube on the main
   railway from Stuttgart to Schaffhausen and Zurich. The chief
   industries are the manufacture of surgical, dental, and laboratory
   instruments, and also boots and shoes. Both these industries are
   represented by a number of factories, many of which, particularly
   the shoe factories, are on a small scale.

 Engineering and Armaments

    A.G-. fhr Feinmechanik    Tuttlingen   (2)
    The A. Gr. fftr Feinmechanik vorm. Jetter &
    S ehe ere r are manufacturers of many
     varieties of surgical, dental, and laboratory
     instruments, and are the largest of a number
     of similar firms in Tuttlingen. Before the
     war they employed some 1,700 workers.

    Armaments Factory     Tuttlingen   (-)

    A recent report states that a new factory
     has been erected to the North-west of the
     town near the railway to Stuttgart. Some
     2,000 workers are said to be employed.
     The products include tank components for
     supply to the Magirus plant in Ulm.
    Laathex

    Carl Henke      Htthringerstr. (3)

    Rieker & Co.     Bahnhof str.  3)

    J.G.Stengelin     Balingerstr.  3)

    The above are among the large number
     of firns in Tuttlingen making all varieties
     of boots and shoes, including special types
     such as ski-boots. They are known to be
     supplying military footwear.



TUTOW (Pomerania)
53° 55' N. 13° 15' E: 585 miles:  (0)

   The small village of Tutow is 9 miles East of Demmin on the
   road to SwineirfJmde. Its only importance is due to the assembly
   plant of the Arado aircraft concern.

- 677 -


  Aircraft and Aero-Engines


Arado Tutow (1)

   The Arado Flugzeugwerke G.nub.H., the
  parent works of which are in Brandenburg
  an der Havel, have a large assembly plant
  at Tutow. It was originally a repair and
  testing station, and is believed to have
  been inactive during part of 1943'
  probably for the purpose of conversion of
  many of the existing installations. In
  the course of 1943 the final assembly of
  JV/. 190's was taken up and has since reached
  a considerable scale. After damage to the
  Arado components factories at Warnemhnde
  and Anklam, it is believed that Tutow has
  taken over part of the work formerly done
  , at Marienburg. Components are probably
  drawn from Kreising and Posen, which
  formerly supplied Marienburg, as well as
  from the reconstructed plants at Warnenüinde
  and Anklam. Aero-engines are imported from
  Berlin.

- 678 -

UECKERMÜNDE (Pomerania)
53° 45' N. 14° 5' E:  635 miles:   (8,000)

  Ueckermunde lies 15 miles Sout-east of Anklam at the
mouth of the small river Uecker, which flows into the estuary of
the Oder. It is at the terminus of a branch line which
leaves the Stettin-Stralsund line 10 miles of Ueckerm&nde.
Its industries are of little importance, and include an
iron foundry, brick making, and a small fishing harbour.
It has, however, been reported that a new factory has
been built during the war, which is making special
electrical equipment for submarines and other naval craft.

 Engineering and Armaments

  N.w Factory      Ueckermunde (-)

   A new factory is reported to have been
   completed at UeckennUnde by September 1942,
   and to be making electrical equipment for
   submarines and other naval craft. The
   report has not yet been definitely confirmed.



UELZEN (Hanover)
52° 55' N. 10° 35' E:    470 miles:  (14,000)

  Uelzen is on the Eastern side of the Luneburger Heide,
55 miles North-east of Hanover, and at the intersection of the
two important railway lines fron Hamburg via lJuneburg to Hanover,
and from Berlin via Stendal to Bremen. It is the centre of an
agricultural area and of the exploitation of the siliceous earth
in this neighbourhood, which is largely used for asbestos
preparations. There are several engineering works, which
in peacetime are on a minor scale, but it is reported that the
Rheirmettal-Borsig concern has now established an ammunition
works at Uelzen.

 Engineering and Armaments

Rheinmettal-Borsig     Uelzen (-)

   An ammunition factory at Uelzen, belonging
   to the Rhe imet tai—Bor sig is reported to
   have gone iiito full production in the
   autumn of 1942, and to be employing some
   3,600 workers. Definite confirmation of
   the report has not yet been obtained.

Kliefoth      Uelzen (-)

   The Asbest fc Kieselgurwerke Kliefoth
   & Co. K.G-. are makers of asbestos
   insulating material, and exploiters of
   the siliceous earth of fossil meal
   deposits found in this part of the
   Lüneburger Heide.

- 679 -

UERDINGEN-RHINE (Rhineland)
51° 23' N. 6° 30' E: 285 miles:  (15,300)

  Uerdingen lies to the North-east of the city of Krefeld along
the western bank of the River Rhine. Although a distance of some
4F miles of fairly open country lies between Krefeld and Uerdingen,
the latter was incorporated in 1929 and the city of Krefeld became
known as Kxefeld-Uerdingen.

  Besides extensive harbour facilities, Uerdingen is important
for its chemical, engineering, and foodstuff industries.



 Transportation



Hauptbahnhof Uerdingen (3)
Main passenger and goods station, about
half a mile from and parallel to the
river Rhine.

Uebergabe Bahnhof      Uerdingen (3)
This is a terminus goods station
situated about one mile South West
of the main station.

Uerdingen-Hafen Uerdingen 3)
Rheinhafen Uerdingen 3)
Osthafen Uerdingen 3)


These three harbours on the western
bank of the River Rhine are situated
North, South, and S.S.W. of the town.
Just North of the Rheinhafen is the
Adolf Hitler Brücke, a road bridge
across the Rhine. The Uerdingen harbour
lies directly north of the ! chemical
works, and the Osthafen is divided from the
Rheinhafen by a small rail bridge. All
three ports are complete with the usual
harbour installations and storage
facilities and the total tonnage of goods
handled in 1938 amounted to-1,190,⁰⁰⁰ tons
of which 778,000 were outward bound and
605,000 inward bound.

Verschiebebahnhof Hohenbudberg (2)
These large marshalling yards lie 2 miles
North East of Uerdingen main station.
They have ä capacity of 6,7°O waggons per
24 hours.



 Public Utility Services


  Gasanstalt Uerdingen (3)
The Uerdingen municipal gasworks is
situated in the south-eastern corner of
a large park to the north-west of
Uerdingen main station. Tn 1937 it
purchased some 62 million cubic feet
from the Ruhrgas A.G.  

- 680 -


 Wasserwerke       Verdingen  (-)

   The town waterworks lie to the south
   of the municipal gasworks and abattoir
   in the same complex.

  Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys
  
 Rheinholdah&tte     noräingn  (3)

   This steel works is a branch of
   Stahlwerk Becker A.G. of Willioh.
   In 1934, both the Willioh works and
   the Rheinholdsh&tte were leased to
   the Deutsche Edelstahlwerke A.G. This
   latter company has been controlled by
   the Vereinigte Stahlwerke A.G. since
   1937. The works lie on the west bank
   of the River Rhine one and a half miles
   South-east of Uerdingen main station and
   directly north of and between the
   Osthafen and the river, thus affording
   easy transport of coal, ore and finished
   goods to and from the plant. It is
   possible that production at this plant is
   linked with that of the main Deutsche
   Edelstahl works about 5 miles to the South
   West of it.


  Liquid Fuels and Substitutes


 Deutsche Rizinus Oelfabrik   Uerdingen (3)
 Boley & Co.

   Lying approximately half a mile to the
   south-east of Uerdingen main station
   and directly along the west bank of the
   Rhine, this plant produces mainly castor
   oil.

  Engineering and Armaments
 Bhttner-Werke A.G.     Uerdingen (3)

   The site of this firm forms a fairly
   extensive triangle of 89,862 square
   metres the base of which lies along
   the western side of the main railway
   station and the apex of which practically
   meets the city waterworks in the south-
   east corner of a park. The plant itself
   covers an area of 66,223 square metres and
   coinprises machine shops, assembly hall,
   foundry with 3 ovens, loading, storage
   and administrative buildings. Alₛo a
   small power station. Industrial drying,
   cooling and vacuuminstallations are
   produced and in 1938, the workers
   numbered some 1,000.


- 681 -

 Waggonfabrik Verdingen A. G.     Verdingen (2)
   Lying about half a mile north of the
   main railway station and covering an
   area of approximately 37 acres on a
   site of 153 acres, this plant comprises
   large assembly, finishing, iron working,
   wood-working, forge and machine shops
   for the production of railway coaches,
   springs and shock absorbers. Variable
   pitch air screws are also said to be
   produced but there is no firm evidence
   to this effect. A 194-3 report gives the
   number of workers as 3,000 and production
   as 3~4- wagons, and 2 tank wagons per day.
   (The pre-war capacity of this works for
   20 tons standard wagons is estimated at
   5,000 wagons per annum and the estimated
   number of workers - also pre-war - is
   1,000 to 1,2000.)

 Chemicals and Explosives
  
 I. G. Farbenindustrie A.G.    Verdingen (2)
   This works was formerly known as the
   Chemische Fabrik Weilerter-Meer. It has
   an estimated annual capacity of between
   10-20,000 tons of 10C^ sulphuric acid. It
   is also engaged in the production of  ₓ
   dyestuffs and other chemicals. The plant
   commences directly to the North-east of the
   main railway station and follows the west
   bank of the river Rhine for about a quarter
   of a mile, at the same time extending inland
   also for about a quarter of a mile.
   
 Guano-Werke A.G.       Verdingen-Linn (3)
   Covering an area of   square metres
   on a site of 110,567 square metres, this
   plant is one of the most modern of its
   kind in Germany. It lies along the
   southern side of the 0 sthafen approximately
   I mile from the main railway station of
   Verdingen and south-west of the Rheinholds-
   hfrtte and is engaged on the production of
   fertilizer and sulphuric acid of which some
   20,000 tons are produced per annum.

- 682 - 
 
  Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

  Rheinische Kunstseide A.G-.    Uerdingen-Linn (3)
   This plant lies Just to the west of
   the Rheinhafen and approx, i mile south
   of the main railway station. It is
   reported that some extensions have been
   carried out and it is believed that the
   works are now engaged solely on the
   production of parachute silk. A further
   report from August 1943, mentions "a very
   large factory" which is said to have been
   built Just west of the Rheinhafen and is
   believed to have "something to do with
   chemicals". It is possible that there is
   a connection between the new extensions
   made to the Rheinische Kunstseide plant and
   this "new factory", though aerial cover
   dated 1940 shows no indication of a) a new
   works nearby the Adolf-Hitler Bridge over
   the Rhine, or b)
extensions to the Rheinische
   Kunstseide works.


 Foodstuffs


  Holtz u. Willemsen G.m.b.H.    Ue rd ingen  (3)
   This works, situated on the west bank of
   the River Rhine Just north-west of
   Uerdingen main station, is engaged on the
   production of edible oils and prior to the
   war had an annual oil seed crushing capacity of
   40,000 tons.
   
- 683 -

ULM (Württemberg)
48° 25' N. 10° E:  500 miles:  (68,000)

  Ulmis the second largest town in Württemberg. It lies
  on the left bank of the Danube and on the main railway line fron
  Stuttgart to Augsburg and Munich. It is the Junction for an
  important branch line leading South to Friedrichshafen, and
  for three minor branch lines serving the surrounding district.
  The central area of the town is dominated by the famous
  "Munster” which is believed to be the largest Gothic
  Cathedral in the world; its steeple is 528 feet high
  and it is thus the highest steeple in Europe. The most
  important industrial undertaking in Ulmis the Magirus A.G.
  This fiim specialises in fire-fighting equipment, but has now
  also attained a high degree of importance as a producer of
  A.F.V‘s and heavy aimoured vehicles. There is a non-ferrous
  metal fabricating plant, which is described below, and several
  other engineering works, some of which are working exclusively
  for Magirus. There is also a small textile and leather
  industry. The Messerschnitt aircraft assembly works at Leipheim
  10 miles east of Ulm, are included in the list given below.

 Transportation

  Railway Centre     Ulm    (2)
   The main railway line from Stuttgart enters
   Ulm from the North-east and, after curving
   Southwards, passes through the main railway
   station, which is on the western side of
   the central city area, crosses the Danube
   and leads in an easterly direction to
   Augsburg and Munich. A branch line from
   Signaringen and South-western Württemberg
   enters the city area from the North-west
   and Joins the Stuttgart line immediately
   north of the main railway station. The
   direct line from Ulm to Friedrichshafen
   diverges from the Munich route between
   the main station and the railway bridge
   and leads south-westwards along the
   left lead from Ulm North-east to
   Heidenheim and South along the River Ille
   to Memmingen.

  Marshalling Yards      Ulm  (3)
   The chief marshalling yards are to the
   North-west of the main railway station
   and inside the main curve made by the
   railway line from Signarlngen before it
   enters the central city area. They are
   capable of handling up to 2,400 wagons per
   24 hours. There is a large goods
   station adjacent to these marshalling
   yards and a second smaller goods station
   half a mile to the East alongside the
   line to Stuttgart.

  Railway Repair Shops    Ulm  (3)
   The railway repair shops, which are at
   the Eastern end of the marshalling yards,

- 684 -

    are "believed to undertake the repair
   of goods wagons and other rolling
   stock. It has however been reported
   that they have new been considerably
   extended and were expected to begin
   the construction of rolling stock
   during the winter 194-2—43.

 Public Utility Services

  Electric Power Station      Ulm (3)
    This thermal power station, built by
   the city of Ulm and now belonging to
   the Oberschwabusche Elektrizitätswerke
   A. G., is connected with the grid of the
   R.W.E. and is believed to have been
   increased in capacity from 25 MW to
   60 MW. It is on the river Blau, a
   small tributary stream which flows
   through the city and joins the Danube
   near the Ulm railway station. An
   indoor substation connects the station
   by a 55-kV long-distance line to the
   RWE substation at Herbertingen for the
   main purose of importing rather than
   exporting electricity.
    Supplies are given locally to consumers
   in the Ulm area.

  Gasworks         Ulm (3)
    The municipal gasworks made 217 million
   cubic feet of gas in 1931.

  Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

  Wieland-Werke       Wielandstr (1)
    The Weiland-Werke A.G. Metallwerke are
   brass founders and non-ferrous alloy
   fabricators. Their works which are to
   the East of the Central area, include
   copper and brass rolling-mills, and they
   are also known to make anti-friction and
   bearing alloys. They are important
   suppliers of duralumin and other light-
   alloy components to the German aircraft
   industry. Seme 3,000 workers are
   believed to be employed.

  Aircraft and Aero-Engines

  Messerschmitt     Leipheim   (2)
    The Messerschmitt assembly plant at
   Leipheim, 10 miles to the East of Ulm,
   is believed to work in conjunction with
   the Pr&fening and Obertraubling plants
   at Regensburg. It is believed to

- 685 -

  have concentrated on the assembly
  of large gliders (Me.323s) and
  possibly also other Messerschmitt
  types. In 1943 the output at
  Leipheim was reported as 10 Me.
  323's per month, and in addition the
  repair of an average of three gliders
  per week. Sane 1500 workers were
  said to be engaged in June 1943, but
  later reports suggest that this
  number had been increased. Reconnaissance
  photographs taken at the end of April
  1944 showed considerable bomb damage
  and for the first time Me. 262 fighters
  were identified at this works. No
  definite indication as to whether they
  had been assembled at Leipheim can as
  yet be given.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Magirus Werke (Werk(l) Ulm (2)
(Werkll) Ulm 2)
(Werklll) Ulm 2)


  The Magirus Werke are, together with
 Mets of Karlsruhe, the chief German
 specialists in fire-fighting vehicles,
 ladders and heavy and auxiliary equip-
 ment. In 1936 the firm was taken over
 by the Klockner- Humboldt- Deutz concern
 and the former Magirus company was
 liquidated. It is, however, still usual
 to refer to the works in Ulm as the
 Magirus Werke. In addition to their
 normal fire-fighting equipment, they are
 now believed to have taken up the
 production of AF.V's or tanks on a
 large scale, and a number of reports
 indicate that Magirus has become a
 highly important supplier of heavy
 armaments.
  Magirus have two works in Ulm proper
 (WerkI and Werk II)
and a third large
 plant has now been established in Neu
 Ulm, the quarter of the town which lies
 on the right bank of the Danube.
  The works referred to as Werk I are in
 the Schillerstrasse close to the
 railway bridge across the Danube. The
 second works are in the Bl^ubeurenstrasse
 in the Western suburb of Söflingen.
 They occupy a large area South of the
 Western end of the marshalling yards
 and are bisected by the small stream
 know as the Blau which flows through
 the town and into the Danube near the
 railway bridge.
  There are several other factories
 (saw mills, roof-felting makers, a rayon
 mill, and a fertiliser factory)
grouped
 round the Magirus works area. It is

- 686 -

thought probable that these two
original works (Werk I and Werk II)
are still mainly engaged on the
production of fire-engines and
equipment, particularly in view of
the severe damage to Metz of Karls-
ruhe, and that the A.F.V's or tank
production is carried out mainly
by the new works in the Neu Ulm area.
One report, however, indicates that
some of the tanks are assembled at
Werk II. Other products of this
Ulm factory are reported to be Diesel
engines, lorries, light transport-
column vehicles, tractors, smoke-
screen devices, propellers and
shafts and other components for
midget submarines. Reports suggest
that in 1945 chenillettes, small
tracked vehicles for reconnaissance,
were being turned out. Reports state
that up to 1944 the new works mainly
built semi-tracked amoured cars,
but that the serial production of
tanks was expected to begin shortly.
The number of workers employed by
Marigus has been variously reported,
and is certainly well over 15,000
in total

Ulmer Schraubenfabrik Blaubeuren str. (3)
The Ulmer Schraubenfabrik. Fervor
(Max Sternweiler & K Rauch)
are
manufacturers of screws, and are
now reported to be working entirely
for the Magirus concern. Their
works are close to the Magirus

Weik II.

Karl Kässbohrer Ulm (3)


  The fiim of Karl Kassbohrer is
  one of the leading German
  manufactures of trailer vehicles.

Gebr. Eberhardt Seestr (3)
    The Gebr. Eberharit (Rud. & Walther
   Eberhardt)
were prior to the war
   makers of ploughshares and
   agricultural implements. Their
   factory is in the North-eastern
   quarter of the town and is now
   believed to be working for the
   Magirus concern.


Gebr. Braun Blaub eurens tr. (3)

    This firm manufactures roof-felting
   and bituminous products. Their
   works are adjacent to and North-
   east of the Magirus Balubeurenstrasse
   plant and are reported to have been
   taken over by that company.

- 687 -

  Steiger 4 Deschler      SÖflingerstr (3)

   The cotton and rayon spinning and
   weaving mills of this firm are
   immediately to the South of
   Magirus Blaubeurenstrasse works.
   In addition to this firm there are
   several other small textile works
   in Ulm making knitted goods, shirts
   and hosiery, which, according to
   ground reports, have all been taken
   over by Magirus.


UNNA (Westphalia)
51° 30' N. 7° 40' E:  355 miles:  (20,000)

  Unna is 10 miles East of Dortmund on the milway line
leading to Soest. Coal mining and the metal-working plants
mentioned below constitute the main industries of the town.

 Transportation

 Marshalling Yards     Unna  (3)
   The Unna marshalling yards are
   capable of handling up to 3,000
   wagons per 24 hours.

 Solid Fuels

 Alten Hellweg      Unna  (3)
   The coal mine of the Gewerkschaft
   des Steinkohlenbergwerks Alten
   Hellweg has one pithead, and in 1937
   had an output of 300,000 tons of
   hard coal. There is a briquetting
   plant attached to this mine which
   produced 100,000 tons of briquettes
   in 1937. Approximately 1,000 workers
   are employed.

 Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

 Messingwerke Unna     Unna  (3)
   The Messingwerke Unna A.G. employed
   some 400 workers before the war.
   They are manufacturers of seamless
   pipes, sections, and other articles
   in copper and brass.

 Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys

 Westig       Unna  (3)
   The Stahlwerk Westig A.G-. employed some
   300 workers before the war. Their steel-
   works have a cold-rolling mill and wire-
   drawing plant.

- 688 -

VACHA (Thuringia)
50° 50' N. 10° E:  450 miles:   (4,000)

 Vacha lies 15 miles South-west of Eisenach and on a branch
railway line which leaves the main Erfurt-Franfurt (Main)
track
at Berka 10 mil as West of Eisenach and follows the valley of the
river Werra to Meiningen. There are a number of basalt quarries
and cement works and a works making agricultural machinery, but
the only industry of importance is the cable works mentioned below.

  Engineering and Armaments
 Kabelwerk      Vacha   (3)
   The Kabelwerk Vacha A. G. employed some 600
   workers before the war and are manufacturers
   of rubber-insulated cable and wire.

VAREL (Oldenburg)
53° 25' N. 8° 10 E:  375 miles: (8,000)

 Varel is 10 miles South of Wilhelmshaven on the main railway
line between Wilhelmshaven and Oldenburg. It is at the inner end
of the Jade Busen, the wide estuary of the River Jade. The Jade Busen
is a shallow bay which is not navigable for heavy craft beyond
Wilhelmshaven. Varel has no industrial development, apart from the
aircraft works mentioned below.

  Aircraft and Aero-Engines

 Motorenwerke Varel     Varel   (3)
   The Motorenwerke Varel G. nub.H. in addition
   to the manufacture of aero-engine components,
   are reported to undertake the over-haul of
   aero-engines.


VELBERT (Rhineland)
51° 20' N. 7° 5' E:  310 miles: (32,000)

 Velbert is a small industrial town, 14 miles N. E. of Dusseldorf.

 The town has several metal-working plants and its chief industry
is the manufacture of locks of all types. Before the war more than
200 factories and workshops were engaged on this, but nearly all of
these are believed to be closed down and the industry has been
cFⁿ^eⁿ^ra^e^  factories which are solely engaged on the production
of 25 different types of locks principally for motor vehicles.

 The most important factories are listed below:-

 Public Utility Services

 Gasworks      Velbert  (3)   
 The mnicipal gasworks draws its supply fron
   the Thyssen grid; in 1936 it sold 140 million cu. ft.

- 689 -


  Engineering and Armaments

Bergisch-Märkisches Eisenwerk Velbert (3)
   This firmis reported to be manufacturing hand-
   grenades, shells, and tread plates for armoured
   vehicles, and to have employed 480 workers in 1942.

  Eisenwerke Franz Metzger (-)

   This firm has two factories at Velbert:- 1)
Manufacturing Bessemer converters, couplings 1)
Hixelzstr.
   for tank-tracks and A. A. shells. Output in
   1942 was reported to be 1,000 couplings and    (3   
   700 shell cases per 8-10 hour shift. Some 700
   workers were employed in 1941 since when the
   factory has formed part of the Herman Goring
   concern.

  2)
Ground reports suggest that setae 200 workers 2)
Hohenzollern
   are employed at this works on the manufacture Str.
   of small grenades. One small section of the
   factory is said to be still engaged on the
   manufacture of locks and keys.

  The Yale & Towne Mfg. Co.  (E: K. S. Handelsgesellschaft m.b. H.) Velbert  (2)   

   Prior to the war this well-known firm employed
   some 1,800 workers at Velbert. Ground reports
   suggest that the factory is fully engaged on
   high-priority armaments work and in view of its
   importance has been able to retain a large
   proportion of its original workers.

  Stanley Werke     Velbert  (3)
   Prior to the war this firm was mainly engaged
   on the manufacture of safety locks and keys and
   employed approximately 1,000 workers. It is
   reported to have been fully active in 1945 but
   little is known regarding its present range of
   products.

  Ernest W. Vellener K.G.    Velbert  (3) 

   Known as the V.K.G.
  (Veltener Kommandit Gesellschaft).

   Manufacturers of roller-type chains such as
   Pull-lifts, chain-blocks and lifting gear. This
   firm employed about 450'workers in 1938.

- 690 -


VELTEN (Brandenburg)
52° 40' N. 13° 10' E:  570 miles:  (9,000)

    Velten is 15 miles North-west of Berlin on the railway to
  Neuruppin. It is 3 miles to the West of the River Havel, with
  which it is connected by canal. In peacetime Velten's induatiy
  includes the nanufacture of tiled stoves and fire-bricks,
  linoleum, and iron and steel products. Since the outbreak of war
  the existing factories in Velten have been considerably extended
  and new factories have been erected, particularly to the South-west
  of the town.

 Aircraft and Aero-Engines

   Tkaria       B er linerstr.  (3)
    The Tkarift Werke G.m.b.H. are manufacturers of
    aircraft accessories, including aircraft weapons
    and gun mountings.

 Engineering and Armaments

   Bergnann & Co.     Velten  (3)
    The Velten works of the Theodor Bergmann & Co.
    K.G. are the parent works of this concern which
    also has factories at Bernau and Suhl. They are
    the leading German producers of tracer ammunition,
    and for many years before the war held a leading
    position in this field of special ammunition
    production. In 1938 the Velten works employed
    about 500 workers. They are reported to be still
    engaged on the production of machine pistols and tracer
    anmunition, but no recent output figures are known.

   Veltag       Velten  (-)

    The Veltener Ofen & Keramik A.G. are manufacturers
    of refractory bricks for indestrial furnaces,
    earthen and stone tiles, ordinary tiles, and other
    roofing materials. Before the war some 600
    workers were employed, and in 1938 extensions
    to the works were planned and there were indications
    that the company was extending its range of
    production.

 Chemicals and Explosives

   Chem. Fabrik Stockhausen    Velten  (-)

    The Chemische Fabrik Stockhausen K.G. formerly
    manufactured all varieties of household and
    industrial soaps.



- 691 -


VIERSEN (Rhineland)
51° 15' N. 6° 25' E:  280 miles:  (35,000)

  Viersen lies 9 miles South-west of Krefeld on the railway line
  from Krefeld to Venlo in Holland. Viersen is the Junction for a
  line running South-east to Mllnchen-Gladbach. The industry of
  Viersen io mainly textiles, and the largest firmis mentioned below.

 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

  Pons & Zahn      Sittarderstr (-)

   The Pons & Zahn Textilwerke A.G. are cotton
   spinners and makers of cotton and artificial-
   silk fabrics and prints. They employed some
   3,000 workers before the war. There is a branch
   works of this firmin Bochum. Ground reports
   suggest that the firmis now inactive.


VILLINGEN (Baden)
48° 5' N.  8° 25' E:  450 miles: (16,000)

  Villingen lies on the Eastern side of the Black Forest. It is
  4 miles West of Schwenningen (in Württemberg)
and on the railway
  line through the Black Forest from Offenburg to Donaueschingen and
  Konstanz. Villingen is a centre for the manufacture of precision
  instruments and for nnetal working. The principal firms are described
  below, but a great deal of the work, which engages most of the
  population of Villingen, is carried on in small workshops dispersed
  throughout the town, many of which are in the workers' own homes.

 Transportation

  Railway Repair Shops    Villingen (3)
   These are medium-sized workshops undertaking
   the repair of goods wagons. They are adjacent
   to the railway s tat ion.

  Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

  Messingwerk      Villingen (3)
   The Messingwerk Schwarzwald A. G. are owned
   by the Wieland Werke A.G. of Ulm, important
   suppliers of duralumin and other light alloy
   components to the German aircraft industry. The
   Messingwerk Schwarzwald A. G. are brass founders
   and non-ferrous metal fabricators. Before the
   war they employed some 300 workers. The works
   are in the South of Villingen between the railway
   and the River Brizach.

- 692 -

 Engineering and Armaments

   Saba Werke     Villingen   (3)
   The Schwarzwald Apparatebau-Anstalt August
  Schwer & Söhne G.m.b.H. are radio manufacturers
  They special in acoustic instruments and
  W.T. tra-nenri salon and receiving sets for the
  German armed forces. 1 ,200 workers are reported
  to be employed. The factory is in the North-
  western quarter of the town.

   Kienzle       Villingen   (3)
   The Kienzle Apparate A.G. manufacture and assemble
  precision instruments of all kinds. Before the war
  same 350'workers were employed. In 1943 they were
  reported to be producii^ "Schansender⁰ for submarines at
  the rate of 300 per month. High-pressure regulators
  for aircraft are also reported to be included among
  their products, with an output of 1 500 per month.
  Approximately 1 ,000 workers were employed in 1943
  This firmis associated with the Kienzle Uhrenfabrik
   A.G. of Schwenningen.

   J. Kaiser      Villingen   (3)
   The Uhrenfabrik Villingen J. Kaiser G.nub.H. are
  well-known manufacturers of docks and precision
  instruments. Approximately 1 ,000 workers are
  believed to be employed.

   Binder       Villingen   (3)
   The Maschinen^ & ElectroApparataf abrik Wilhelm
  Binder, who normally manufacture conponents for
  motorcars, are now believed to be specialising
  in searchlight components.

 Chemicals and Explosives

   Explosives Plant    Villii^en   (-)

   It is reported that a new explosives plant
  has been constructed in the vicinity of
  Villingen. These works are said to have
  gone into operation in May 1941 ad to be
  employing sane 2,000 workers. The plant is
  well camouflaged and is partly underground.

 - 693 -



VOCKERODE (Anhalt)
50° N. 12° 20' E:   535 miles: (400)

  Vockerode lies 3 miles East of Dessau on the left bank of the
  Elbe, and on a branch railway between Dessau and Coswig. This
  small village has no inportanoe apart from the large electric power
  plant described below

 Public Utility Services

  Electric Power Station   Vockerode  (1)

  The Elbekraftwerk, which is owned by the
  Elektrowerke A.G-. of Berlin, is a thermal
  generating station which went into operation
  in 1939, and is now believed to have been
  extended. It is thought that the original
  intention was for this new station to replace
  the older Golpa-Äschornewitz power station
  The installed capacity of the Vockerode station
  is 175 MW.

  A 110-kV line is known to connect the station to
  Golpa-Zschomewitz, and it is probable that
  additional lines connect to Piesteritz, to reinforce
  the supply to the carbi de-cyanamide works, and to
  Dessau
 

VOLKLINGEN (Saar)
49° 15' N. 6° 50' E: 345 miles (44,000)

  Völklix^en lies 5 miles West of Saarbrücken on the Northern bank
  of the river Saar. It is on the Western edge of the coal-mining
  district, the principal mines of which are described under the
  heading Saarbrücken The chief industry of Völklingen is the large
  Röchling iron and steel works. There are two important electric
  power stations to the East and South-west of Völklingen.

 Public Utility Services

  Power Station     Fenne    (2)
  This thermal power station is situated on the left
  bank of the Saar some 5 miles from Saarbrücken and
  a mile East of Völklingen. It was built as a French
  station in 1926, and is new owned by the Röchling'ache
  Eisen u. Stahlwerke G.m.b.H. Its installed capacity
  is at least 79 MW with a layout designed for an
  ultinwtft capacity of 185 MW. Fuel is supplied from ad-
  jacent coal fields.
  An indonr substation adjoins the generator hall. Main
  switching is at 35 kV and cables at this voltage
  connect to Louise nt hal, Wehrden, Htthnerfeld, Sprengen,
  and. Gerslautern.
  No long-distance supplies are given.

- 693a -

   Power Station    Wehrden  (2)
    This thermal power station is situated, on the left
   bank of the Saar 2 miles West of the Penne power
   station, in Wehrden, which adjoins Völklingen to
   the West, It is owned by the Kraftwerk Wehrden,
   G.m.b.H., an operating company in which the
   Röchling'sehe Eisen u. Stahlwerke G.m.b.H. own
   25/₃ of the capital, and has an installed capacity
   of 60 MW.
    There are two substations. One, the main substation,
   connects with local supplies at 5.25 kV and 55 kV.
   The other, a special substation for 6.25 kV, 10 kV
   and 55 kV, is associated with one of the low-pressure
   turbo-generators which is leased to the Vereinigte
   Saar Elektrizit&ts A.G., a company which controls the
   general distribution of the town of Saarbrücken.
    Half of the output of the station is delivered to the
   iron and steel works of the Röchling¹ sehe
   Eisen u. Stahlwerke. There are 35 kV-lines to
   Gerslautern, Penne, and Saarbrücken but no long-
   distance supplies.

 Solid Fuels

   Röchling     Völklingen (2)
    The coking plant belonging to the iron and steel
   works of the Röchlingsehe Eisen &. Stahlwerke G.nub.H.
   has 216 ovens and an annual rated dry-coal capacity
   of 1,100,000 tons.

  Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys

   Röchling     Völklingen (1)
    The works of the Röchlingsehe Eisend Stahlwerke
   G.nub.H. & Edelstahlwerk Röchling occupy a large
   area in the centre of the town. They include 7
   blast furnaces, 1 electric furnace, and 5 basic
   steel furnaces. The capacity of the plant is
   650,000 tons of pig iron and 750,000 tons of crude
   steel per annum. It also has a large output of
   special steel. The works produce armour plate,
   girders and rails, sheet iron, and wire. There is
   also said to be a small production of shells, spare
   parts for aircraft and steel for tool making. In
   1942 seme 7500 workers were reported to be employed.


- 694 -


WALCHENSEE (Bavaria)
47° 40' N. 11° 20' E: 590 miles: (0)

 Walchensee is a small village on the Western shore of the
Walchen See, 45 miles South of Munich in the Bavarian Alps. There
is an important hydro electric scheme at Walchensee.

 Public Utility Services

  Hydro Scheme       Walchensee (1)
  The Walchensee hydro scheme, which was built
  in 1924, uses the water power of the Walchen
  See and the Kochel See, one mile to the North.
  There is a 670 ft. head between these two lakes.
  The natural inflow of the Walchen See is augmented
  by obstructing part of the water of the river Isar
  by means of a diversionary canal from Krtnn 6 miles
  South of Walchensee to the Southwestern corner of
  the lake. Between the two lakes the water flows
  for J mile through a tunnel. The penstock leading
  into the Kochel See is 1,450'ft long and comprises
  6 pipe lines tape ring in diameter from 7^- ft. at
  the top to 6 ft at the bottom. The installed
  capacity of this hydro-electric station is 124 W.
  It contains special generating plant for supply to
  the German State Railways, as well as plant for
  general supply. Water supply is at a maximum
  in spring, when the snow melts, and at a mini rm m
  during the frosts of winter.

 



WALDECK (Hesse Nassau)
51° 10' N. 9° 5' E: 410 miles: (1,000)

  Waldeck is 20 miles South-west of Kassel in the valley of the
River Eder. Dnnediately to the South of the village is the Edersee,
a large reservoir made by darning the River Eder, which provides the
water power for the important hydro electric scheme described below.

 Public Utility Services

  Hydro Scheme       Waldeck (1)
  This electric power scheme is based on the damming
   of the River Eder, an undertaking which was first
   put into operation in 1914. The dam near Waldeck
   impounds 202 million tons of water in the Edersee,
   and serves three main purposes, namely: to store
   water for improving navigation on the River Weser,
   to control flood waters, and to stpply power for
   electricity. There are 4 generating stations.
   The Hemfurth I station near the Edersee dam has a
   capacity of 14 W. Hemfurth II, one ndle downstream,
   which is equipped with puaped-storage plant. has a
   capacity of 18 W. To compensate for the irregular
   flow through the turbines of the two Hemfurth stations,


- 695 -


   a weir, the Affoldern, 5 miles downstream, has been
   built to create a compensating reservoir The
   generating station at Affoldern has a capacity of
   5 W. Finally, in 1933, a large pumped-storage
   station was built on the bank of the Affoldern
   compensating reservoir which was used as a lower
   reservoir, the upper reservoir being artificially
   constructed on the flat top of the Peterskopf
   Mountain in the Bringhausen Forest This generating
   station, known as the Bringhausen station, has a
   capacity of 120 MW and is used for meeting peak
   loads and emergencies The Bringhausen jumpedr-
   storage systemis one of the largest of its kind
   The upper reservoir is 980 feet above the generating
   station, and has an effective water content of
   760,000 tons. The penstock consists of two parallel
   pipes 3,150'feet long, tapering in diameter from
   8 feet at the top to 7 feet at the bottom. There is
   an adjoining table railway

   The Eder dam was breached by air attack in May 1943
   and the reservoir largely depleted of water, while
   the power stations escaped serious damage. The reservoir
   has since been drained as part of the reconstruction
   work now in progress.



WALDENBURG (Silesia)
50° 45' N.   16° 15' E:  710 miles:  (65,000)

  Waldenburg lies 40 miles South-west of Breslau on a railway
line leading from Breslau via Olatz through the Southern corner of
Lower Silesia to Czechoslovakia. Waldenburg is the chief mining
centre in the Lower Silesian coalfield The deposits cover a wide area
extending to the West as far as Oppan, and to the South-east as far as
Wtaschelburg on the former Czechoslovakian frontier. The two
principal firms exploiting these deposits are mentioned below There
is also a chemical works connected with the coking plant on ging to
these mines which vas closed in 1932, but which may have repnimed
Operations The thermal electric—power plant belonging to the
Niaderschlesische Bergbau A.G is described below under P. U. S.
The other industries of Waldenburg are chiefly the man ufacture of
glass and porcelain

 Public Utility Services

GiÄckhilf       Nieder Hermsdorf (2)
   The Glftokhilf thermal electric-power station
   is situated in Nieder Hermsdorf, a South-western
   suburb of Waldenburg. It is owned by the
   Niederschlesische Bergbau A.G., whose coal mines
   are mentioned below This power station has
   a capacity of 74 MW.

   It is known that a cable was laid to connect the
   station to the projected 220-kV line at Tschechnitz.
   Sie line is planned to run from the industrial area
   Of Silesia via Trattendorf and Golpa to link up
   with the main 220—kV line between Berlin and the
   Suhr. A 100-kV line runs from Gl&okhilf to


- 696 -


  Liegnit.


 Goworics      Waldenburg   (3)
  The Gas zentrale Niedersohlewian G.m.b.H. has
  its main distributing centre at Waldenburg, It
  draws gas from the coking plants of the
  Nieder schlesische Bergbau A.G., and supplies
  Waldenburg and some 20 other places. Total
  sales in 1936 were 1,050 million cu. ft.

 Solid Fuels


 Niederschlesische Bergbau A.G.   Waldenburg   (2)
  The Niederschlesische Bergbau A.G. are the
  largest coal-mining concern in the Waldenburg
  area. They own several pits ip the district
  the majority of which are grouped to the North-
  west of the team. They are as follows: the
  Fuchsgrube at Weissstein to the North-west, the
  Davidgrube in Konradsthal, the Seegen Gottes
  Grube in Altwasser, the Glüokhilf-Friedenshoffhung
  in Nieder-Hermsdorf to the South-west, (this pit
  has its own power station described above under
  P. U. S.), and the van Kulmizgrube in
  Dittesbaoh to the South-east. The company owns
  three coking plants, of which the largest is at
  Nieder-Hermsdorf. The total output of all the
  above mines was 5,200,000 tons per annumin
  1937. The coking plants have an annual rated
  dry-coal capacity of 650,000 tons. Some 11,000
  workers were employed by the Niederschlesische
  Bergbau A.G. in 1937.

 Waldenburger Bergwerks A.G.   Waldenburg   (3)
  The Waldenburger Bergwerks A.G., with which are
  incorporated the pits of the former Furst von
  Pless concern, own three coal mines to the South-
  east of Waldenburg. These are the Fürst einer,
  the Hflns-Heinrich, and the Marie-Schacht mines.
  The Furst einer mine includes a coking and by-
  products plant. The output of these three mines
  was 1500,000 tons in 1937. The coking plant
  has ah annual rated dry-coal capacity of 210,000
  tens. Some 4,700 wo Heers were employed by the
  Waldenburger Bergwerks A.G. in 1937.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Garlshütte G.nub.H.     Waldenburg &  Altwasser (3)
         

  The Carlshutte MaHnhinen-imd Stahlbau Gesellschaft
  m.b.H, are makers of coal-cleaning and coal-
  grading plant. The firmis associated with
  KI Sckner-Humboldt-Deutz A.G. of Koln-Deutz. The-
  number of employees before the war was 1,000.

- 697 -

 Chemicals and Explosives


  Anorgana      Waldenburg (-)

   A chemical plant employing the N. E.C. process
   was erected at Waldenburg by the Furst von Pless
   mining administration (now known as the
   Waldenburger Bergwerks A.G. )
to utilise their
   surplus coke-oven gas. The original capacity
   of this plant was 23,000 tons of nitrogen per
   annum. These chemical works, which were renamed
   the Anorgana Chemische Handelsges., were
   purchased in 1932 by the LG. Farben and the
   Deutsche Ammoniak Verkaufs-Vereinigung, and
   the plant was closed down. It may now have
   resumed production.

 

WALDSHUT (Baden)
47° 35' N. 8° 15' E:  465 miles:  (7,000)

  Waldshut lies on the Upper Rhine close to the Swiss border,
  approximately halfway between Schaffhausen and Basle. Waldshut
  occupies a central position in the chain of electric power
  stations which form the Upper Rhine hydro scheme. A second
  hydro scheme utilises the water of the Schluchsee, which lies
  12 miles North of Waldshut. Both these electric power stations
  are described below under P. U. S.

  Public Utility Services

  Hydro Scheme    Upper Rhine (1)
   The Upper Rhine hydro scheme utilises the
    water-power resources of. a 90- miles stretch
    of the River Rhine between the Schaffhausen
    Rhine falls and Basle. This scheme embraces
    a system of 15 hydro electric power stations
    of which some are under Swiss control.
    Waldshut lies geographically in the centre
    of this chain öf stations. The German-
    controlled stations are Rheinau (35 MW),
    Eglisau (35 MW), Reckingen (36 MW), Waldshut-
    Kadelburg (37 MW), Albbruck-Dogern (72 MW),
    Laufenburg (68 MW), Säckingen (45-75 MW),
    Riburg-Schwttrstadt (104 MW), Rheinfelden
    (65 MW), and Augst-Wyhlen (51 MW). The Swiss-
    controlled stations are Schaffhausen (16 MW),
    Rheinfall (100 MW), Beznau (25 W), Klingnau
    (35 MW), and Birsfelden near Basle (50 mW).
    Special features of this hydro scheme are the
    unusually constant flow of Lake Constance,
    and the fact that the maximum flow is in
    July, and the minimumin Februa, ry, owing to
    the freezing in winter of the hi^i Alpine
    water sources which feed this part of the
    river. It is thus possible to maintain a
    high electrical output all the year round,
    with a maximum value in summer, when most
    other hydro schemes are obliged to operate
    with reduced output.

- 698 -

  The scheme has been jointly developed by
  the German and Swiss Governments. The total
  installed capacity is 447 MW, of which the
  German share is 224 and the Swiss 223 MW.

  Hydro Scheme    Schluchsee (1)
  The Schluchsee hydro scheme in the Black
 Forest is designed for an ultimate capacity
 of approximately 400 MW. When fully
 developed it will use the 1,970 ft. head
 between the Schluchsee lake and the
 River Rhine at Waldshut, a distance of 12
 miles. The work was planned in three stages.
 Stage one included the damming of the
 Schluchsee, creation of a reservoir of
 108 million tons capacity, a.nd the huildi ng
 of a pumpedr-storage station at Häusern for
 a head of 660 ft. Stage two was the building
 of a pumped-storage station at Witznau
 for a head of 930 ft. Stage three, which is
 still projected, is the building of a pumped-
 storage station at Waldshut for a head of
 380 ft. Below Häusern and Witznau generating
 stations there are two reservoirs of 1.3 and
 4.5 million tons capacity respectively, to
 . serve as daily and weekly storage basins.
  In 1929 construction was begun on the first
  stage (Hausern)
and on a provisional compensat-
  ing station at Eichholz. This work was completed
  in 1933, the installed capacity of the
  generating plant at Hauserh being 104 MW.
  and at Eichholz 30 MW. In 1938 construction
  was begun on the second stage (Witznau), the
  intention being to close down Eichholz when
  this was completed. It is believed that this
  work was finished in 1942, the installed
  capacity of the generating plant at Witznau
  being approximately 176 MW, and the total for
  the scheme as then developed 280 MW. The
  scheme provides for maximum output in the
  winter months, and is designed to compensate
  for the reduced output of the Upper Rhine
  stations when the Alpine water supplies are
  frozen. The projected pumped-storage station,
  which has yet to be built at Waldshut, is
  planned to have a capacity of 100 MW.

  Substation     Tiengen  (-)

  The precise position of this important sub-
  station is unknown. It is the main collecting
  point for the surplus output of the Upper
  Rhine and Schluchsee water-power scheme, and
  is also the terminus of the 380/220 kV long-
  distance line connecting the hydro-electric
  stations of the Upper Rhine and Vorarlberg
  to the Ruhr industrial area via Herbertingen,
  Hoheneck, Rheinau, Kelsterbach, Koblenz, and
  Brauweiler substations, a distance by this
  route of 360 miles. Three 110 kV lines
  connect to Albbruck-Dogern, and two connect
  possibly to Klingau, two to Häusern power
  station, and two possibly to Berau switching
  station.
 
 - 699 -

 Chemicals and Explosives


   Lonza     Waldshut (3)
     The Lonza Elektrochemische Fabriken G.m.b.H.
     are a subsidiary of the Swiss company of the
     same name at Campe 1. These works manufacture
     carbide and cyanamide- The cyanamide capacity
     in 1938/39 was 20,000 tons of nitrogen.
     The production in 1938 was estimated at 14,000
     tons of nitrogen. This factory has also been
     reported as manufacturing liquid for flame-
     throwers. The works is located 2500 yards
     East of the Waldshut railway station. Some
     1500 workers are believed to be employed.

 Aircraft and Aero-Engines

   Aircraft Works     Wutoschingen (-)

     It has been reported that at Wutoschingen,
     7 miles to the East of Waldshut, an air-
     craft-components works has been erected.
     The number of workers engaged there has been
     stated to be as high as 5,000. It seems
     probable that this report, which has not
     been confirmed, refers to the non-ferrous
     metal plant, described below.

 Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

   Alum! niim Walzwerk    Wutoschingen (2)
     The Aluminium Walzwerk Wutoschingen G.m.b.H.
     are important manufacturers of a variety
     of light-metal alloys and aluminium products,
     including sheet, strip, circles, sheet
     sections, and drawn sections, rods, wire,
     rivets, shaped sections, forgings and blooms.
     Reports suggest that a variety of semi-
     finished aircraft components are produced.

- 700 -


WALSRODE (Hanover)
52° 45' N. 9° 35' E:   420 miles: (6,000)



  Walsrode is in the Luneburger Heide, 35 miles North
of Hanover, on a branch railway line running North from
Hanover to Join the Stendal-Bremen line, 6 miles North
of Walsrode. Walsrode is the Junction for a second mi nnr
branch line running from Verden to Soltau. It is a
market centre for the surrounding agricultural district
and contains the important explosives factory described
below.


 Chemicals and Explosives

Wolff & Co Bomlitz (2)
  This factory is operated by Wolff & Co.
  K.G. a subsidiary of the I.G. Farben
  concern. It produced nitro-cellulose
  during the 1914-1918 war (at the rate of
  369 tons monthly)
and was allowed to
  continue the manufacture of explosives,
  concentrating on the production of
  smokeless powder. From 1938 onwards
  considerable extensions have been made
  to the plant and to the number of persons
  employed there. A variety of reliable
  reports puts the 1943 pay-roll at between
  13,000 and 15,000. On the assumption
  that this is primarily a propellant-
  powder plant, a production of about
  40,000 tons a year is indicated. The
  factory is situated at Bomlitz, 5 miles
   N. N. E. of Walsrode.


- 701 -

WALTERSHAUSEN (Thuringia)
49° 55' N. 10° 55' E:   470 miles: (10,000)

  Waltershausen lies 8 miles West of Gotha on a branch
line which leaves the main Erfurt-Frank fort/Main line 2
 miles North of the town. In peacetime, like Sonneberg,
Wai tershausen specialises in the making of dolls and other
toys, and this forms the chief industry. There are, however,
factories making woven hosepipes, which are now of some
importance.

 Rubber and Tyres

  Schlauchweberei      Waltershausen (3)
  The Thüringer Schlauchweberei & Gunmiwerke A.G.
  are manufacturers of woven fire-hoses and
  other rubber articles. Before the war they
  employed seme 400 workers.

  Adloff      Tabarz   (3)
  The C. A. Adloff Gurt Schlauchweberei &
  Gummiwarenfabrik have a range of products
  similar to the firm mentioned above.
  Tabarz, which has 2,000 inhabitants, lies
  2 miles South-west of Waltershausen.

 

WANNE-EICKEL (Westphalia)
51° 50' N. 7° 10' E:   310 miles: (89,000)

  The area here covered is roughly the admjnistm.tive
district of Wanne-Eickel. The southern boundary lies about
2g- miles North-west of Bochum and the area extends to the
Rhine-Herne canal. Gelsenkirchen adjoins it in the West
and Heme in the East.

  Industry in this area is almost entirely concerned with
the mining of coal and the production of coke.
There are also a synthetic oil and a synthetic ammonia plant.
There is a large marshalling yard North-east of Wanne.

 Transportation

  Marshalling Yards     Wanne    (2)
  These yards lie immediately to the North-
  east of Wanne station and extend about
  1 mile in length; their capacity is
  5,200 wagons per 24 hours.

  Twin locks      Rhein-Herne Cana] (3)
  This is the 5th set of twin locks on
  the Rhein-Herne canal. They are located
  miles off Wanne station.
 
 - 702 -

 Public Utility Services

 Hannibal Power Station    Eickel   (3)
   This power station is located at the
   Hannibal Colliery 1^ miles South-east
   of Wanne station. It is owned by
   Krupp Treibstoffwerke G.m.b.H. and its
   principal function is to supply current
   to the nearby synthetic-oil pl ant,
   (see under " L. F. and S. ”). The
   capacity of the plant is estimated at
   39 MW.

 Hanover Power Station     Hordel   (3)
   Owned by Fr. Krupp, the power station is
   situated adjoining the Hanover coking
   plant, 1g- miles South of Wanne station.
   The capacity is estimated at 20 MW.

 Gasworks       Wanne-Eickel  (3)
   The V.E.W. gasworks draws supplies from
   the Krupp coking plant at Bochum-Hordel.
   In 1936 it sold 125 million cu.ft.

 Solid Fuels

 Hanover coking plant     Hordel   (3)
   Situated 1£ miles South of Wanne
   station, the plant is owned by Fr.Krupp
   A.G. There are 73 ovens having an
   estimated annual dry coal capacity of
   434,000 tons. Gas is supplied to the
   Ruhr gas grid. The plant supplies
   metallurgical coke to Krupp's works
   at Essen.

 Shamrock 3/4 coking plant   Wanne    (3)
   Situated 5 mile East of Wanne station
   and adjoining the Shamrock colliery, the
   plant is owned by Bergwerkgesellschaft
   Hibernia A.G. There are 100 coking
   ovens having an estimated annual dry
   coal capacity of 710,000 tons. Gas is
   supplied to the Ruhr gas grid.

 Hannibal coking plant     Eickel   (&)

   Owned by Fried. Krupp A.G. the coking
   plant adjoins the Hannibal colliery
   ft miles South-east of Wanne station.
   There are 100 ovens having an estimated
   annual dry coal capacity of 290,000
   tons.

- 703 -


 Shamrock 3/4 Colliery    Wanne   (3)
  The Colliery is owned by Bergweik-
  gesellschaft Hibernia A.G. and is
  situated adjoining the coke ovens
  1 mile East of Wanne station. In
  1937 the output of terd coal amounted
  to 1,028,000 tons.

 Hannibal Colliery    Eickel   (3)
  Situated at Eickel 1| miles South-east
  of Wanne station, and adjoining the
  synthetic oil plant, it is owned by
  Er. Krupp A.G. In 1937 the output
  of hard coal amounted to 1,060,000
  tons.

  Liquid Fuels and Substitutes

 Krupp Synthetic Oil Plant    Bickel   (3)
  This Fisoher-Tropsch synthetic-oil
  plant is owned by Krupp Treibstoffwerke
  G.m.b.H. and is situated adjoining
  the Hannibal power station and coking
  plant, I5 miles South-east of Wanne
  station. Capacity is estimated at
  130,000 tons of oil products per annum,
  and storage capacity at 14500 tons.
  The products of the plant are petrol,
  gas-oil, and lubricants.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Wilhelm Knapp      Wanne-Eickel (3)
  Maschinenfabrik Wilhelm Knapp G.m.b.H.
  produces pneumatic tools and machines,
  and also ventilation equipment for
  mines.

 Chemicals and Explosives

 Hibernia synthetic—ammonia, plant  Hol  sen (3)
  The synthetic—ammonia plant is owned by -
  Bergweikgesellschaf t Hibernia A. G. and
  is situated !§ miles East of Wanne station.
  The Mont Cenis process is used; hydrogen
  is obtained from coke-oven gas and rriirogen
  from the air by the Linde process. The
  capacity of the plant is estimated at
  40,000 metric tons of nitrogen per AJQXQ2Z1
  Power is obtained from the R.W.E. grid.

- 604 -


WAREN (Mecklenburg)
53° 30' N. 12° 40' E: 560 miles: (16,000)

 Waren is on the railway from Berlin to Rostock, 20 miles
North-west of Neustrelitz. It is on the Northern shore of the
Muritzer See, and is a marketing centre for the surrounding
agricultural district. Apart from a few minor engineering
works, the only firm of note is the non-ferrous metal plant
described below.

  Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

 Metallwarenfabrik    Waren    (2)
   The Meokleriburgisdhe Metallwarenfabrik m.b.H.
   have a branch works situated immediately to
   the South of Waren. The plant is of modern
   construction and is believed to employ some
   2,000 workers on the manufacture of duralumin
   products. The works include a foundry and
   a large rolling mill







WARENMÜNDE (Mecklenburg)
54° 10' N. 12° 5' E:  545 miles: (11,000)

 Warnemünde is 6 miles North of Rostock, where the river
Warnow, after widening into a large lagoon (Der Breitling),
is connected with the Baltic by a narrow channel through the
tongue of land on which Warnemünde is built. Warnemunde serves
as an advance port for Rostock, and in peacetime is a holiday
resort. The important train-ferry service operates between
Warnemünde and Gjedser in Denmark. Prior to the war it parried
200,000 persons and 250,000 tons of goods per annum; this service
is now being used to maintain the armed forces in Norway and .
Finland.

 The port area is in constant use by minor naval units
aM other light craft as a base for exercising in the Baltic.

 The branch factory of the Arado Flugzeugwerke is situated
to the south of the town.

 Transportation
 Train-ferry Landing     Warnemünde   (2)
   The landing consists of 2 berths each with
   a draw-bridge and raising gear to convey
   trains on to the ferries. There are 3
   special train-ferry ships, of approximately
   1,600, 2,800 and 3,200 tons respectively.
   The length of the route is 40 km, and the
   time of crossing 2 hrs 10 mins.


- 605 -



   Aircraft and Aero-Engines

   Arado Warnemünde (2)
    The latest available information on this
    branch works of the Arado Flugzeugwerke
    G.m.b.H., the parent factory of which is at
    Brandenburg an der Havel, indicates that
    the chief present activity is the manufacture
    of engine frames and cowlings and the
    mounting of B.M.W. 801 engines for shipment,
    as complete power units, to the final
    assembly plant. In addition fuselage work,
    which had ceased as a result of bomb
    damage, has been resumed. The plant was
    formerly mainly engaged on the Aroda 196 and had
    a monthly output of 15 aircraft, but there is
    now evidence (still somewhat conflicting)
that
    the present fuselage work is connected
    with FW.190.






WASSERALFINGEN (Württemberg)
48° 50' N. 10° 5' E: 480 miles: (5,000)

   Wasseralfingen lies in the Eastern part of Württemberg,
   30 miles East of Stuttgart, and on the railway from
   Stuttgart, to Nordlingen.

Hüttenwerke G.m.b.H. Wasseralfingen (3)
  The Schwäbische Hüttenwerke G.m.b.H. are iron
  founders and specialise in the manufacture
  of slow-combustion stoves. The firmis
  associated with the Gutehoffnungshutte of
  Oberhausen, and has several branch works
  in Southern Germany. Before the war a
  total of some 1,800 workers were employed.



WATTENSCHEID (Westphalia)
51° 30' N. 7° 05' E: 310 miles: (62,000)

  The district of Wattenscheid is bounded in West by Essen,
  in the North by Gelsenkirchen, and in the' East by Bochum.
  Industry here is mainly concerned with the production of
  coal and coke.

- 706 -

 Solid Fuels


  Centrum-Morgensonne coking plant Wattenscheid (3)
  Owned by Rheinische Stahlwerke A.G. the
  coking plant is situated adjoining the
  Centrum pit, 1 mile East of Wattenscheid
  station. There are 43 ovens having an
  estimated annual dry coal capacity of
  206,000 tons. Gas is supplied to the
  Ruhr gas grid.

  Rheinische Stahlwerke Collieries Wattenscheid (3)
  Centrum Pits 1/3/8 a⁶ situated about
  1 mile East of the station and Fröhliche
  Morgensonne about i mile South of the
  station; both are owned by Rheinische
  Stahlwerke A.G. The combined output in
  1936 amounted to 1,206,000 tons of
  hard coal.

  Holland 3/4 Colliery   Wattenscheid (3)
  Owned by Gelsenkirchener Bergwerks A.G.
  The colliery is situated 1 mile North-
  west of the station. In 1936 the output
  of hard coal amounted to 1,211,000 tons.

 Liquid Fuels and Substitutes

  Centrum tar distillation plant  Wattenscheid (3)
  Owned by the Rheinische Tahlwerke A.G.
  the plant is situated adjoining the
  colliery (see above). Output is
  estimated at 11,000 tons of tar
  distilled per annum.




WEIDA (Thuringia)
50° 45' N. 12° 5' E: 530 miles: (12,000)

  Weida is on a branch railway line 8 miles South of Gera.
The manufacture of leather goods is the chief industry
of the town, and there are also a number of small textile mills.


 Leather


0. & k Dix A.G. Schlossmuhlenweg (-)

Franz Prasse Pfortenstr. -)


  . The above are the two largest of four leather
  factories in Weida, making chiefly upper leather,
  equipment and saddlery leather, box calf, and
  side and fancy leathers. Dix employed some
  700 and Prasse some 300 workers before the
  war.

- 707 -


WEIDEN (Bavaria)
49° 40' N. 12° 10' E:  555 miles: (28,000)

  Weiden lies in the North of Bavaria on the main line from Hof to
Regensburg. It is the junction, for a branch line leading North-westwards
to Bayreuth. The principal industries are glass and porcelain, but
apart from the firm mentioned below, none is individually of importance.
There are important railway-repair shops.

 Transportation

  Railway Repair Shops    Weiden   (3)
  These large railway-repair shops are
  North of the main railway station.
  They employed some 1,200 workers in
  1938 and undertook the repair and    ‘
  maintenance of locomotives, passenger
  coaches, and goods wagons.

 Engineering and Armaments

  De tag       Weiden   (-)

  The Deutsche Tafelglas A.G. (Detag),
  the parent works of which are in
  Fttrth, have a large branch factory
  in Weiden which makes various kinds
  of sheet glass. This company, which
  has also branch factories in
  Niederlausitz and the Ruhr, employed
  approximately 1,000 workers before the
  war.



WEIMAR (Thuringia)
51° N. 11° 20' E:    500 miles: (58,000)

  Weimar lies on the main railway line from Berlin to Frankfort/
Main via Halle and Erfurt. It was formerly the capital of a small
principality and is now the chief town of the Province of Thuringia.
The Fritz Sauckel Werke, which are described below, are large
producers of armaments, and their expansion in recent years has given
Weimar a high order of importance to the German war machine. There
are a number of other engineering works which normal ly make machinery
for the textile and chemical industries, electrical apparatus, and
fire-fighting equipment. There is also a large uniform factory.
Several of the industries, including the Frits Sauakel works, are
situated close to the main railway station in the Northern quarter
of the town.


- 708 -


  Fritz Sauokel      Weimar  (2)   
  The Berlin-Suhler Waffen- & Fahrzeugwerke
  (Fritz Sauokel Werke)
are inportant
  makers of small arms and of armoured
  military transport, such as self-propelled
  gun carriages. Their plant has been
  greatly expanded during the war and 6,000
  workers are now reported to be employed.
  The works are situated on the Northern
  side of the town immediately East of
  the main railway station.
   Among the equipment reported as being
  built in Weimar are rotary .excavators,
  heavy projecting apparatus for rocket
  torpedoes, and a caterpillar-tracked
  armoured vehicle carrying 6 rocket
  Wurfgeräte" and one A. A. gun.

  Motoren A Maschinenbau    Weimar  (3)
   The Motoren & Maschinenbau G'm.b. H. are
  makers of textile machinery, vacuum
  pumps, carburettors, and high-pressure
  compressors. Their works are on the
  Western side of the main railway station.

  Bflhring A.G      Weimar  (3)
   The Apparatebau A.G. Bühring are makers
  of machinery for the textile and chemical
  industries. Their factory is near the
  railway station on the Western side of
  the Motoren & Maschinenbau G'm.b.H.
  mentioned above.
  Dittmann       Schwanseestr. (3)
   The. Waldemar Dittmann Maschinenbau &
  Vertrieb are makers of fire-fighting
  pumps, A.R.P. equipment, paint sprays,
  and similar apparatus.

 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper
  Uniform-Werkstätten     Weimar  (3)
   The Weimarer Uniform-Werkstätten Gnub.H'
  are manufacturers of all kinds of
  military uniforms. Their factory employed
  several hundred workers before the war.


- 709 -

WEINHEIM (Baden)
49° 35' N. 8° 40 E:    410 miles:  (18,000)

 Weinheim lies on the railway which runs through the fruit-growing
district on the Western slopes of the Bergstrasse from Darmstadt via
Heidelberg to Karlsruhe. The industries are chiefly connected with
the leather and rubber industries, and also include glass and porcelain
works and a small soap factory.

 Leather

 Carl Freudenberg     Weinheim   (2)
  The Carl Freudenberg Simmerwerke are
  specialists in leather and artificial
  oil-seals and washers. They also make
  upper leather. A second factory in
  Weinheim belonging to this firm makes
  artificial sausage skins. The company
  is reported to employ some 3,000
  workers.

 Hirsch G'm.b.H.      Weinheim   (3)
  The Lederwerke Sigmund Hirsch G'm.b. H.
  manufacture box calf, chrome, and
  horse-hide leather products. They
  enployed some 500 workers before the
  war. Hirsch is an affiliated company
  of Carl Freudenberg.

 Rubber and Tyres

 Weisbrod & Seiffert      Weinheim   (3)
  The Weinheimer Guinmiwarenfabrik
  Weisbrod & Seiffert m. b. H. produce
  conveyor and driving belts, and all
  kinds of industrial hose. They
  are also producers of cycle tyres.
  Normally some 300 workers are employed.


WEISSENFELS (Province Saxony)
51° 10' N. 12° E:    550 miles: (41,000)

 Weissenfels is on the main line from Berlin to Frankfurt am
Main via Halle and Erfurt, and the junction for a branch line
leading to Zeitz. Weissenfels is in an important brown-coal
mining district, and the principal mines are mentioned below. The
Gross-Kayna mines provide fuel for the adjacent thermal power
station. The other industries of Weissenfels include boot and
shoe manufacture, flour milling, iron ware, and a few small
engineering works.

- 710 -

 Transportation

Marshalling Yards    Weissenfels (3)
These marshalling yards are capable of
handling up to 2,400 wagons per 24
hours.
Railway Repair Shops    Weissenfels (3)
These are medium-sized repair shops
undertaking mainly the repair of goods
wagons.

 Solid Fuels
Michel A Vesta     Gross Kayna (3)
These two open-cast brown-coal mines
belong to the Michel-Werke of Halle.
The combined output in 1937 was
2,650,000 tons and the briquetting
plant had an output of 800,000 tons.
Some 1500 workers were employed.

Leonhardt Mine     Neumark (3)
The Leonhardt brown-coal mine of the
Michel-Werke had an output in 1957
of 500,000 tons and the briquetting
plant of 100,000 tons. Seme 400
workers were employed.

Gutohoffnung Mine    Rossbach  (3)
The Gutehoffnung brown-coal mine of
the Michel-Werke had an output in 1937
of 600,000 tons and the briquetting
plant of 160,000 tons. Some 500 workers
were employed.

 Public Utility Services
 
Electric Power Station   Gross Kayna (2)
  This thermal power plant, which is the
  main station of the Elektrizitätswerk
  Sachsen-Anhalt A. G,, has a capacity of
  56 MW, and is in the small town of
  Gross Kayna, 5 miles North of
  Weissenfels. The fuel used is brown
  coal, which is obtained from the
  adjacent open-cast mine. Power is

- 711 -

       supplied to a large briquetting plant
       which adjoins this station, and it is
       thought probable that the large
       chemical and synthetic—oil plants at
       Leuna near Merseburg (5 miles North
       of Gross Kayna) also obtain power
       from this station.

 Engineering and Armaments

  Hoddick & Rftthe G,m.b.H.   Weissenfels (-)

  This firm manufactures pumps and
  compressors, and in peacetime
  employed 100 workers.

 Leather

  Emil Blasig A.G     Weissenfels (-)

  The above is an example of a number of
  small firms manufacturing boots and
  shoes. The Emil Blasig Ä.G-. employed
  150 workers before the war.

WEISSIG (Saxony)
51° 20' N. 13° 25' E:  580 mile: (1,000)

  Weissig lies 5 miles East of Riesa on the railway line from
  Riesa to Dresden. It is the railway station for Nünchritz, a
  small settlement on the right bank of the Elbe with 3,000
  inhabitants before the war, where there is a branch factory of
  the von Heyden chemical works of Radebeul.

 Chemicals and Explosives

  Von Heyden A, G'     Nünchritz (3)
  This branch works of the Chemische Fabrik
  von Heyden A.G. of Radebeul, which is known
  as the "Werk Weisseg”, was erected in 1901
  as a sulphuric-acid plant. The works was
  reported in 1943 to be producing phenol for
  synthetic resin.

- 712 -


WEISSTEIN (Silesia)
50° 45' N. 16° 15' E:  710 miles: (17,000)


  Weisstein lies on a branch railway 5 miles North-west of
  Waldenburg and is in the coal-mining are of Lower Silesia. The
  principal coal mines in this district are dealt with separately
  under Waldenburg. The only industry in Weisstein is the making
  of boots and shoes. There are no firms of individual importance.




WENZENDORF (Hanover)
53° 20' N. 9° 45' E:  440 miles: (500)


 Wenzendorf is a small village 14 miles to the South-west of
Hamburg and J miles North-west of Buchholz, a station on the
Hamburg-Bremen line. It gives its name to the adjacent G-. A.F.
airfield. The aircraft section of the Blohm & Voss shipbuilding
concern is reported to have established a storage and components-
assonbly plant at Wenzendorf.

 


WERDAU (Saxony)
50° 45' N. 12° 25' E:  545 miles: (22,000)

 Werdau lies 6 miles West of Zwickau and on the main railway
line from Leipzig to Plauen. It is the junction for a branch line
which leads via Zwickau to Chemnitz. The manufacture of measuring
and precision instruments is a speciality of the town and Werdau
has become a production centre of some importance in this branch.
The two principal works are described below, but there are also a
number of smaller firms engaged in the industry which are estimated
to employ approximately 1,000 additional specialist craftsmen. A
factory making textile machinery and other examples of the
engineering works in Werdau are also described below, Werdau has
a considerable textile industry represented by some 20 mills which,
though individually of small size, made up a large aggregate
production before the war. Their present activity is not known
but it is believed to be very limited.


 Transportation

 Railway Junction Werdau (2)
  Werdau is in the centre of the highly-
  industrialised district of Saxony, and is
  the junction for two important lines. It
  lies on the main North to South route via
  Leipzig, Werdau, Plauen and Hof. A branch
  line leading from Dresden via Chemnitz and
  Zwickau joins this main route to the South
  of Werdau and forms a direct connection
  between Dresden and Bavaria. Two minor
  branch lines lead Westwards from Werdau.


- 713 -


    Railway Repair Shops   -verdau  (3)
    These are medium-sized repair shops
    undertaking the repair of goods wagons.

 Engineering and Armaments

    Maffa Werk    Bismarckstr. (3)
    The Maffa Werk m.b.H. Werkzeugfabrik
    are raakers of precision instruments,
    micrometer gauges, draughtsmen's imple-
    ments and compasses, spring measures,
    spirit levels, and all kinds of
    measuring equipment. In 1935 they
    built and occupied new factory premises.
    They employed 1,000 workers before the
    war.

    Mass Industrie    Zwickauerstr. (3)
    The Mass Industrie G.m.b. H. have a
    similar range of products to the Maffa
    Werk mentioned above. They employed
    approximately 1 ,000 workers before the
    war, and maintained a special training
    establishment for apprentices.

    C. K Schwalbe     Zwickauerstr (3)
    The G.E.Schwalbe Spinnereimaschinen-
    fabrik & Eisengiesserei are makers of
    machinery and apparatus of all kinds
    for the spinning industry. Before the
    war they employed some 500 workers
    and produced largely for the export
    market.

    SchumannG. m. b. H,    Werdau  (-)

    The Fahrzeugbau Schumann G-. m.b. H. is
    one of the leading German manufacturers
    of trailer vehicles.

 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

    C. G. Schön A. G.   Crimmit- schauerstr. (-)
     
    Richard Walther    Königswald er str. -)

    The above are examples of some 20 small
    spinning mills in Werdau. Approximately
    100 workers were employed at each of
    the above mills before the war.

- 714 -

WERDER (Brandenburg)
52° 25' N. 12° 25' E: 560 miles: (10,000)

 Werder, on the River Havel, is 20 miles South-west of
the centre of Berlin, Normally its main activity is connected
with the canning and preserving industry, particularly of the
fruit grown in this neighbourhood. Several of the firms engaged
on this work are now supplying the armed forces. N.w works for
the manufacture of plastics have recently been erected in Werder.
To the South-west there is an aerodrome, which has been extended
during the war.

Aircraft and Aero-Engines

 Martin Schmid    Werder  (-)

   The Vulkanfiber-Fabrik Martin Schmid,
   the headquarters of which are in Berlin,
   have erected a branch factory at Werder
   which is now reported to be making
   aircraft components of plastics. Some
   J00 workers are said to be employed.





WERDOHL (Westphalia)
51° 15' N. 7° 50' E: 345 miles: (13,000)

 Weirdo hl is one of a chain of industrial settleinents along
the valley of the river Lenne, which are engaged in steel-rolling
and metal-working of all kinds. The three larger plants in
Werdohl are described below. There are in addition several
smaller factories and workshops engaged in wire-drawing, nail-
making, and other light metal-work.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Bruninghaus A. G.    Werdohl   (2)
   The Stahlwerke Bruninghaus A. G. are important
   producers of steel springs, in particular for
   railway rolling-stock. This company, which is
   a subsidiary of the Vereinigte Stahlwerke A. G.
   of Dusseldorf, employed some 1 500 workers
   before the war, but is now thought to have
   been considerably enlarged. A recent, report
   states that these works are one of the three
   most important suppliers of these products,
   the others being the Hoesch plant at Hohen-
   limburg and Dittmann-Neuhaus at Herbede. These
   three factories are believed to supply the
   German railways with practically their entire
   requirements of springs.

 Thomee A. G.    Werdohl   (3)
   Friedrich Thomee A. G. , a subsidiary of the
   Vereinigte Stahlwerke A. G. of Düsseldorf,
   manufactures girders, iron and steel con-
   structions, profiles, banks, and wire
   products. The factory, which comprises a
   large rolling-mill and wire-drawing plant,
   employed some 500 workers before the war.

- 715 -

   V. D.M. Werdohl (3)
    The Vereinigte Deutsche Metallwerke
    A. G-. whose headquarters are in
    Frankf‘ort/Main, have branch works at
    Werdohl which include a foundry and
    rolling mills processing non-ferrous
    metals and produce sheet metal,
    profiles, rods and bands. The Werdohl
    plant is believed to be the smallest
    of the V.D.M. works.



WERNIGERODE (Province Saxony)
51° 50' N. 10° 45' E: 470 miles: (23,000)

   Wernigerode lies on a branch line from Halberstadt to
 Goslar, 10 miles South-west of Halberstadt, It is normally
 an agricultural marketing centre, but has now attained some
 importance through the development into a large-scale under-
 taking of the metal working plant described below.

 Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

   R. Rautenbach     Wernigerode (2)
    The main works of the Rudolf Rautenbach
    G.m.b. H. are in Solingen. The Wernigerode
    plant was originally built as a shadow
    factory with a complement of 800 workers
    employed on the manufacture of light-alloy
    castings. This factory has, however, been
    greatly extended during the past few years,
    and is now reported to employ some 4,000
    workers. Among the products of these works
    are crankcases for B.M.W. aero-engines.
    It is believed that the crankcases are sent
    to the main works of this firm at Solingen.
    The Wernigerode plant includes three Siemens
    electric melting furnaces, and 30 smaller
    furnaces.

   Kupferwerk Ilsenburg A.G.   Ilsenburg-Harz Wernigerode (3)

    This company own smelters and refineries
    used chiefly for the treatment of scrap.
    Their refinery capacity is estimated at
    10,000 tons per annum for electrolytic
    refining and 14,000 tons per annum for
    fire-refining.

- 716 -

WERTHEIM (Baden)
49° 45' N. 9° 30' E: 450 miles: (4,000)

 Wertheim lies on the River Main in the extreme Northern
part of Baden and 20 miles West of Wurzburg. Apart from the
explosives factory mentioned below, there is no industry of
importance.

 Chemicals and Explosives

 Hasloch     Wertheim (3)
   The factory of the Pulverfabrik Hasloch
   G.m.b.H. made small quantities of nitro-
   cellulose powder for military purposes in
   the last war and was licenced to continue
   manufacture of sporting powders in the
   peace years at the rate of 49 tons per
   month. It is fairly reliably established
   that the plant was making 10 tons of nitro-
   cellulose daily in 1942. This large
   increase of output suggests that this
   production is now used for military purposes.
     



WESEL (Rhineland)
51° 40' N. 6° 40' E: 290 miles: (25,000)

 Wesel lies on a railway line leading from the Ruhr to Holland.
It is a junction for Munster, Osnabrück and Bocholt. Wesel is
an important agricultural marketing centre. There are a number
of small engineering works, of which none is of individual import-
ance.


 Transportation


 Railway Repair Shops   Wesel   (3)

   These repair shops undertake mainly
   the repair and maintenance of goods wagons.
   Adjacent to the workshops are goods and
   marshalling yards.

 Public Utility Services
 Electric Power Station    Wesel   (-)

   The Kraftwerk Niederrhein, also known as
   the Wesel & Obeighofen power stations, is
   of the thermal type and has an installed
   capacity of 15 MW.

- 717 -

WESSELING (Rhineland)
50° 49' N. 7° E: 280 miles: (6,000)

 Wesseling lies 8 miles South of Cologne on the left bank of
the river Rhine. It is on the railway line between Cologne and
Bonn. The normal industries of the town included some light
engineering, leather, and chemicals. The harbour on the Rhine is
a coal-loading station for the brown-coal mines in the vicinity.
The synthetic-oil plant is a wartime development and is the
principal industrial establishment in the Wesseling area.

 Public Utility Services

 Power Station    Wesseling (2)
   This thermal generating station forms part
   of the synthetic-oil plant of the Union
   Rheinische Braunkohlen-Kraftstoff A.G. It
   has an installed capacity of 60 MW but it is
   believed that this capacity will be doubled
   by 1944/45. (See also under L. F. and S. ).

 Liquid Fuels

 Synthetic Oil Plant   Wesseling (2)
   The Union Rheinische Braunkohlen-Kraftstoff
   A.G. hydrogenation plant lies one mile due
   East of Wesseling on the left bank of the
   Rhine, The Berguis process is used. The
   plant is believed to have come into production
   in 1941 and it was then credited with an
   annual production of 25,000 tons. Maximum
   capacity, believed to be of the order of
   200,000 tons per annumis believed to have been
   achieved in 1942 but in the course of 1943
   a number of circumstances are believed to have
   been responsible for a decline in output to
   100,000 tons per annum. 1944 estimates rate
   the plant as again working at full capacity
   i. e, 200,000 t, p. a.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Feldmühle Papier & Zellstoffwerke A.G-. Wesseling (2)
   The Wesseling branch factory of this large
   concern is considered to be one of the
   principal German manufacturers of aluminjnm-
   oxide abrasives including paper and cloth
   abrasives. The factory is known as Werk
   Koholyt-Wesseling and covers an area of
   156,670 square metres on a site of 419,210
   square metres. It has its own switching and
   transformer station obtaining power from the
   R.W.E. grid.

Baunswerke A.G.    Wesseling (3)
   This firmis reported to build bridges and
   components for narrow-gauge'locomotives.
 
- 718 -

 Chemicals and Explosives


 Chemische Fabrik Wesseling A. G. Wesseling (3)

   Sulphuric acid and various ferro-cyanide
   and ferric oxide compounds are manufactured
   here particularly for dyestuffs. Bleaching
   powder is also produced. The firm owns a
   second plant in Neuss.
 



WESTERLAND (Schleswig Holstein)
54° 50' N. 8° 20' E: 420 miles: (4,000)


 Westerland is on the Island of Sylt off the West coast
of the Danish Peninsula, and is connected with the mainland
of Schleswig-Holstein by the Hindenburg railway dam. In
peacetime Westerland is chiefly a health resort. There are
reports that an important aircraft-repair station is now
established at Westerland.


 Aircraft and Aero-Engines


Repair Works Westerland (3)

   A large aircraft-repair station is
   established at Westerland which in 1942
   was reported to be employing 1 500
   workers.

 

WETZLAR (Hesse Nassau)
50° 33' N. 8° 30' E: 380 miles: (26,000)

 Wetzlar, which is in the valley of the river Lahn 7 miles
West of Giessen, is an important town in the German optical-
instrhment industry. The Leitz concern which, next to Zeiss,
is the largest unit in this Branch, has its parent works in
the town, and there are several smaller works also making
optical instruments and components. As is the case with Jena,
this industry, which demands a high degree of training, has
produced an unusually large concentration of skilled workers
in one town. Wetzlar has also an iron and steel industry,
several engineering works, and a spinning and weaving mill.


 Transportation

 Marshalling Yards Wetzlar   (3)
   The marshalling yards and goods station
   are in the Northern quarter of the town
   adjacent to the Karolinenhütte steelworks.

 - 719 -

 Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys


 Sophienhutte     Wetzlar   (3)

  The Buderus' sehe Eisenwerke A. G. are an
  important iron and steel concern owning
  iron-ore mines, iron and steel works, and
  numerous foundries in Central Germany.
  The Sophienhutte, the parent works of this
  concern, are in the Northern quarter of
  Wetzlar, and include three blast furnaces
  with a capacity of 140,000 tons of pigiron
  per annum.
  The adjacent steelworks of the Stahlwerke
  RÖchling-Buderus A, G. , which is owned
  Jointly by the Buderus concern and the
  Edelstahlwerke Röchling A.G. of Volklingen
  (Saar), have four Martin and three electric
  furnaces with rolling mills and hammer works.
  The plant is of modern construction and it
  has been reported that these works have now
  undertaken the manufacture of shell cases,
  gun barrels, and tracks for tanks and heavy
  transport vehicles. The number of workers
  has been reported to be as high as 3,000.

 Karolinenhutte    Wetzlar   (3)
  The steelworks and rolling mills of
  H. Jung & Co, , Karolinenhütte G. m. b, H,
  are adjacent to, and probably work in
  conjunction with the Sophienhutte
  worts described above.



 Ernst Leitz Gwiiub.H.    Laufotoferweg (1)
  N.xt to the Carl Zeiss concern, the
  Ernst Leitz G.m.b.H. are the leading
  German makers of optical instrument $
  and lenses. Their parent factory at
  Wetzlar is a large complex of multi-
  storeyed buildings of modern construc-
  tion in the centre of the town. There
  is also a subsidiary factory in Wetzlar,
  and a branch in Rastatt/Baden. Leitz
  undertake the production of the complete
  range of optical instruments, including cameras,
  range-finders, binoculars, and periscopes
  and also finish their entire requirements
  of lenses. In peacetime some 8,000
  workers were employed, and it is probable
  that this number has now been largely
  increased.

- 720 -

Hensoldt Söhne Moltkestr. (2)

   The M. Hensoldt Söhne A.G. are the leading
   German makers of binoculars and periscopes,
   and employed approximately 1,200 workers
   before the war.

A.G. fÖr Optik & Mechanik A.Dölling (2)

Otto Seibert der jüngere Frankenstr.  2)

Georg Kremp A.G.  Braunfelsenstr. 2)


   The above are three of a number of maller
   undertakings in Wetzlar making optical
   instruments and components. Each of these
   three firms employed some 200 workers
   before the war.



Hercules Werk  Wetzlar  (-)


   The Hercules Werk G.m.b.H. vorm. W. Momma
   are manufacturers of bending and pressing
   machines. They normally employ some 120
   workers.



 Berkenhoff u. Drebes A.G.  Asslar   (3)


   This is a firm of brass and copper
   fabricators including brass foundry.
   They make a variety of small components
   for the local instrument works.



 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

 Spinnerei Wetzlar   (-)

   The Spinnerei & Weberei Wetzlar K. G.
   have a spinning and weaving mill
   with 5,010 spimiles and 124 weaving
   stools. The factory is reported to
   have been inactive since 1%1.

- 721 -


WIESBADEN (Hesse Nassau)
50° 5' N. 8° 15' E:  38° miles: (166,000)

 Wiesbaden lies 2 miles from the right bank of the Rhine
opposite Mainz. It is connected with Kainz by a branch railway
which terminates at Wiesbaden. A second railway leads Nor Ihwo-dF
from Wiesbaden to Limburg, and a minor branch line connects the town
direct with Frankfort/Main. Wiesbaden itself owes its importance
mainly to its development as a health resort of European reputation.
The industries, which chiefly consists of engineering and chemical
works, are grouped in the outlying suburb of Biebrich, which lies
2 miles South of the town on the banks of the Rhine. The list
below also includes the villages of Bierstadt to the East, Dotzheim
to the West, and Schierstein to the South-west. The village of
Oestrich, which lies some 10 miles further down the Rhine, and
includes a chemical plant, is dealt with separately.

 Public Utility Services

 Power station    Wiesbaden (3)
   The municipal power station at Wiesbaden
   has an estimated installed capacity of
   18 MW. Tts output in 1936 was 26 million
   kWh. it works in conjunction with the
   Mainz plant of the Kraftwerke Mainz-
   Wiesbaden A.G.

 Gasworks     Wiesbaden (3)
   The Wiesbaden municipal gasworks draws
   its supplies from the works of the Kraft-
   werke Mainz-Wiesbaden A. G. In 1936 sales
   were 450 million cubic feet.

 Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

 Glyco Metallwerke    Dotzheimerstr. (-)

   The Glyco Metallwerke Delaen & Loss
   G.m, b, H. are manufacturers of solders
   and metal-plating compositions.
      
 Engineering and Armaments

 Linde A.G.      Hilda Str. (3)
   The Gesellschaft fur Linde's Eismaschinen
   A. G. are the largest German specialists in
   regrigerating and cooling equipment. They
   have several branch works in other parts
   of Germany making refrigerating plant, and
   machinery and apparatus for the chemical
   industry, a factory in Aschaffenburg making
   Diesel motors, and cold-storage plants in
   several large cities. Wiesbaden is the
   headquarters of the concern, and contains
   the administrative offices, a research lab-
   oratory, and an experimental plant. At
   Kostheim on the North bank of the Rhine, 2

- 722 -

  miles upstream from Biebrich and opposite
  Mainz, is the factory of G.H.Walb & Co. ,
  which is owned by Linde and manufactures
  refrigerators for domestic use.

 Rheinhütte G.m.b.H.    Rheingaustr. (-)

  The Rheinhütte G.m.b.H. vorm. Ludwig Beck
  & Co. manufacture fittings and apparatus
  for the chemical industry. They employed
  some 300 workers before the war.

 Machinenfabrik    Rudolfstr.  (-)

  The Maschinenfabrik Wiesbaden A. G. are
  manufacturers of steel radiators, cranes,
  and lifts. They employed some 300
  workers before the war.

 Buchold Keller    Nauroderstr. (-)

  The Buchold Keller G. m. b. H. , whose works
  are in Bierstadt, an Eastern suburb of
  Wiesbaden, manufacture piston rings and
  various kinds of boring machinery. They
  employed some 150'workers before the war.

 Chemicals and Explosives

 Kalle & Co. (I. G.Farben) Biebrich   (2)
  The Kalle de Co. A. G. are the leading German
  makers of cellophane and cellulose products
  and-, accounting for approximately 75 per
  cent of the total German output, they are
  also important makers of dye-line paper.
  These dye-line papers are considered sup-
  erior to the normal blue-print paper. It
  is probable that this firm, in conjunction
  with the synthetic resin plant of Albert,
  is also making resin-impregnated papers
  now used as substitute insulating materials
  in the electrical industry. The company,
  which is owned by the I.G. Farben, employed
  some 3,000 workers before the war. Their
  works occupy a large area in the suburb of
  Biebrich, between the railway station and
  the Rhine.


- 723 -

  Albert A.G.      Amoneburg   (3)

   The Chemische Werke Albert A'G. are an
   amalgamation of the two firms formerly
   known as H. & E. Albert and Dr.Kurt Albert
   G.m.b.H. H. & E.Albert are makers of
   pharmaceuticals and of chemical fertilisers
   and insecticides. Dr,Kurt Albert G,m,b,H,
   manufacture synthetic resins and plastics.
   These works are in Amoneburg, which is
   regarded as a suburb of Mains and is on the
   Northern bank of the Rhine immediately East
   of and adjoining Biebrich,

  Gliscna Werk     Sohl eratein  

   The Gliscma Werk Willy von Knoop is in the
   South-western suburb of Schierstein and
   manufactures mica and other insulating
   materials.

  Hassia      Rudesheimerstr. (-)
  Lyssia      Walkmuhlenstr, -)

   The Chemische Fabrik Hassia A.Hupfner & Co,
   and thfe lyssia Werke Chemisch-Pharmazeutische
   Produkte G.m.b.H. are makers of pharmaceuticals.

  Seek & Alt      Rheingaustr. (-)

   The Chemische Fabrik Biebrich vom. Seck &
   Alt are makers of roof-felting, tar-spraying
   fluids, and other bituminous products.




WILDFLECKEN (Bavaria)
50° 20' N. 9° 55' E:  445 miles: (600)

  Wildflecken lies in the extreme North-west of Bavaria, 15
  miles South-east of Fulda. It is in the Rhon Mountains and at
  the terminus of a branch line which leaves the Fulda-Würzburg
  line 15 miles to the South West. A large munition works has
  been established in the vicinity.

  Engineering and Armaments

  Ammunition Factory    Wildflecken (-)

   A.large ammunition dump and shell-filling
   factory is reported to be situated 4 miles
   North-west of Wildflecken. The factory is
   said to be well camouflaged in a wooded
   area, and is heavily defended with A. A.guns.
   It is reported that some 1500 workers are
   engaged, mostly Polish and Czechoslovakian
   women. The workers live in hutments near
   the dump, which are also well concealed in
   the woods.


- 724 -

WILHELMSHAVEN (Oldenburg)
53° 32' N. 8° 7' E: 375 miles: (140,000)

 Wilhelmshaven lies on the North Sea coast at the mouth'
of the small river Jade which flows into the sea a few miles
West of the Weser. It is 40 miles North-west of Bremen and
is at the end of a branch railway from Bremen via Oldenburg.
It is the Eastern terminus of the Ems-Jade Canal and thus has
access to the Dortmund-Ems Canal system. Wilhelmshaven is one
of Germany's largest naval bases and is the headquarters-of
the North Sea Western Group and North Sea Coastal Defence Commands,
The naval shipbuilding yards of Wilhelmshaven (the Kriegsmarine
Werft)
have built many famous German warships, including the
35,000 ton battle-cruiser Tirpitz. In the past few years,
however, the port has chiefly concentrated on the building of
submarines, mainly of the 500-ton class. The yards at Wilhelmshaven
also undertake the repair and maintenance of E-boats and other
light craft of a similar type. There are a number of oil-storage
depots without the port area, described below under Liquid Fuels,
but apart from the one firm listed under E. and A.
Wilhelmshaven contains no other industries of importance;

 Transportation

 Port Area      Wilhelmshaven (2)
   Wilhelmshaven has an extensive system of
   docks which extend for 5 miles along the
   Northern shore of the Jade Busen, the large
   bay at the mouth of the river Jade. These
   docks are all enclosed and are entered
   through three lock gates at the Eastern end.
   The dock systemis in course of expansion
   to the Northwards.
   The yards of the Kriegsmarine Werft are
   situated in the Bau-Hafen which lies to the
   East of the town. It is the innermost of
   the harbours and has access to the sea via
   the Ausrüstungshafen.
   The Grosser-Hafen is the chief coaling and
   nnwerni port and lies immediately South
   of the town. It includes extensive quay
   and loading facilities, oil-storage plants,
   and rail sidings. Immediately to the West
   is the Zwischen-Hafen which contains one
   large and two small floating docks. The main
   coal-loading quays are in the Zwischen-Hafen.
   Further West is the West-Hafen which includes
   the yards of the Deutsche Werke A.G. On the
   long sea-wall which divides the main docks
   from the Jade Busen are a number of oil-storage
   installations and the seaplane base which is
   mentioned below under F Air craft and Aero Engines'.
   The Ems-Jade Canal enters the port from the
   West, passes through the Kanal-Hafen (a
   channel with loading facilities which extends
   along the landward side of the dock system), and
   terminates in the Grosser-Hafen.
   In the last few years reclamation work has been
   in progress immediately to the North-east, of the
   main port area where the coastline curves round
   to the Nortnw'a, and it is reported that a new
   dock, outer port, and uthor harbour installations
   are in process of construction.
 
 - 725 -
 
 Public Utility Services

   power Station    Bau-Hafen   (3)
    This thermal power station, which is in
    two sections, is situated in the Naval
    dockyard (Kriegsmarine Werft). It has a
    total installed capacity of 34 MW.

   Gasworks       (3)

    The municipal gasworks made 210 million
    cu. ft. of gas in 193&.

 Liquid Fuels and Substitutes

   Oil Storage Depots   Wilhelmshaven (3)
    There are numerous oil-storage depots
    in the port area, the principal group of
    which is on the sea wall which divides
    the main dock system from the Jade Busen.
    These tanks have an estimated total
    capacity of 127,000 tons. There are other
    tanks alongside the Grosser Hafen, in .
    the area of the naval dockyard in the Bau
    Hafen, and in the Verbindungshafen area.
    The estimated total storage capacity of
    these tanks is 44,000 tons. It is not known
    to what extent the storage facilities are
    being utilized.

 Aircraft and Aero-Engines

   Seaplane Base    Grosser-Hafen (3)
    The Jade Busen serves as a seaplane alighting
    zone. The buildings of the seaplane base
    are built on the sea wall enclosing the
    Grosser-Hafen.

 Shipbuilding

   Kriegsmarine Werft   Bau-Hafen   (1+)

    The yards of the Kriegsmarine Werft are
    at the Western end of the Bau-Hafen. Before
    the war this highly-important shipbuilding
    centre was one of the principal naval yards
    for the construction of the German capital
    ships. Among many famous vessels built
    in these yards were the 35,000 ton battle-
    cruiser "Tirpitz", sister ship of the
    "Bismarck", the 26,000 ton battle-cruiser
    "Schamhorst", and the two 10,000 ton
    pocket-battleships "Graf Spee” and'Admiral
    Scheer". Since the outbreak of war the
    Marine Werft has been almost completely
    turned over to the production of submarines,
    chiefly of the 500-ton class.
    There are six graving docks, of between JdO
    and 630 feet long, and two building slipways
    of 500 feet length. The yards are capable
    of building up to 12 submarines simultaneously.
    In September 1943 H U-boats were reported as
    under construction and two submarines afloat
    and fitting out. The workshops serving these
    ships lie along the Western and Southern sides
    
- 726 -    

    of the Bau-Hafen.
    The yards, which also include two large
    floating cranes, are extensively served
    by rail sidings and have their own power
    supply described above under “ Public
    Utility Services . " I   In 1941 ten thousand workers were employed
    in these yards and this figure is believed
    to have increased to approximately 12,000
    by the end of 1942.

   Deutsche Werke A.G-.   West-Hafen  (2)
    The shipbuilding yards known as the
  Deutsche Werke A.G. are on a small scale
  compared with the Kriegsmarine Werft but
  t   have been extended and modernised since
    the war. They are now mainly used for the
    repair and servicing of E-boats and
    submarines.

   Commercial Dockyard   Zwischen-Hafen (2)
    The Zwischen-Hafen contains three floating
  docks, of which the largest is of 15,000
  tons. On the quays surrounding this basin
  j   there are a number of commercial shipyards
    which are now devoted to naval purposes and
  carry out mainly the repair and servicing
  of destroyers, torpedo-boats, submarines and
  naval auxiliaries.


 Engineering and Armaments

   Franz Kuhlmann    Rustringen  (3)
    This firm which is situated in the Western
    suburb of Rustringen, formerly manufactured
    drawing office equipment and measuring
    instruments of all kinds. They are now report-
    ed to be making gauges and special apparatus
    tQT U-boats.

  
WISMAR (Mecklenburg)
53° 54' N. 11° 28' E: 515 miles: (35,000)

  Wismar lies on the Baltic coast 35 miles East of Lubeck.
 It is at the end of a branch railway connecting with the main
 line from Lubeck to Rostock. It is a market centre for the
 neighbouring agricultural district. The chief industrial
 importance of Wismar is now due to the assembly plant of the
 Norddeutsche Dornier Werke aircraft concern, which is described
 below. There is also a large firm of railway-wagon builders.
 The shipbuilding industry is also represented, and there are
 other minor general engineering works.

- 727 -

  Aircraft and Aero-Engines

  Dornier Werke    Wismar  (2)
   The Norddeutsche Dornier Werke G. m.b.H,
    are an important subsidiary of the Dornier
    concern, which has factories in Berlin—
    Reinickendorf, Wismar, and Lübeck. They
    have one main and 2 small subsidiary
    factories in Wismar. The main works, which
    is situated on the airfield, is engaged on
    the assembly of Dornier 217 long-range
    bdnbers and Dornier 24 transport aircraft
    and imports components from the nearby
    subsidiary works. The work of fuselage
    centre-section and wing inner—section
    assembly, which was formerly carried out
    at "Die Werft”, is now reported to have been
    transferred to Neustadt-Glewe. Of the
    smaller works making components in Wismar,
    Werk I, which is in the Southern outskirts
    of the town, consists mainly of machine shops
    with lathes and presses. Weik II is in a
    group of old buildings to the South-east of
    the Industriehafen. No details are known
    of this plant, which appears to be on a
    small scale. It has been reported that as
    many as 6,000 workers are employed in the
    Wismar group of Dornier factories.

 Shipbuilding

  Ship Yard      Wismar  (3)
   There is a small shipbuilding yard at'Wismar
    which is reported to undertake the construction
    and servicing of E-boats and other small
    craft. In April 1943 2 E-boats were building.
    There was also a cargo steamer undergoing
    repairs. The name of the yard is not definitely
    known.

 Engineering and Aimaments

  Waggonfabrik Wismar A.G.  Wismar  (3)
   The Triebwagen & Waggonfabrik Wismar A.G
  are makers of railway goods-wagons and
  passenger coaches. They can also undertake
  the construction of electric locomotives,
  street-cars, lorries and trailers. Some
  2,000 workers are reported to be employed.
  The majority of the shares of this company
    are controlled by the Eisenbahn Verkehrs-
    mittel A.G. of Berlin.

- 728 -

WITTEN (Westphalia)
51° 25' N. 7° 20' E: 320 miles: (76,000)

 The area considered here extends from Herbede and Herdecke on
the river Ruhr northwards, including Witten, Annen, and Kruckel to
Hombruch and Langendreer: it excludes the Längerereer marshallii^
yard which is described under "Bochum” . ”

  Witten lies at the South-eastern end of the Ruhr industrial area,
6 miles South-east of Bochum. The area contains the Herdecke hydro
scheme, three small steelworks, various engineering works, and a
factory making chemicals.

 Transportation

 Railway Workshops    Witten    (3)
   The railway-repair workshops are situated immediately
   North of Witten station. The workshops are of medium
   size and employed 970 workers before the war.

  Public Utility Services

 Herdecke Hydro Scheme (-)

   The Herdecke hydro scheme is based upon the
   Hei^jsteysee, an artificial reservoir created by
   damming the river Ruhr below its confluence with
   the Lenne, and consists of 3 hydro-electric stations
   and an important substation. The scheme has an
   installed capacity of 146 MV. and is owned by the
   Rheinisch-7/estfalisches Elektrizitätswerk A.G-. (RWE.)
   Essen.

 Her^stey I & II Power Stations.   Hengsteysee   (3)
   These two power stations are part of the Herdecke
   Hydro scheme.

   Hei^stey I, a flow station of 3 MW. capacity, is on
   the weir at the end of the reservoir. Hengstey II, a
   si mil ar station also of 3 MW. capacity, is on the
   river Ruhr a mile below Hengstey I, from which it is
   controlled. Both stations are of local importance
   only.

 Koepchenwerk      Hengsteysee   (1)
   Thi s is the third and by far the most important
   of the stations which comprise the Herdecke hydro
   scheme.
   The Koepchenwerk is a punped-storage station of
   12J0 MW. capacity)
it is situated on the North bank
   of the Hengsteysee, 6 miles E.S.E. of Witten. 540
   feet above the station is the upper storage reservoir,
   a smell er reservoir which is filled with water from
   the lower reservoir by pumps situated in the generator
   hall below. Four large pipe lines arranged in pairs
   connect the upper reservoir with the station; these
   made a conspicuous landmark but since the war have
   been heavily camouflaged.


- 729 -

  In the power house are 4 turbines, 4 alternators, and. 4
  pumps. During low-consumption periods on the R.W.E
  grid, the punps, operated by the alternators, replenish
  the upper reservoir The station is for peak load
  'nd emergency use; its great importance lies in that
  when the upper reservoir is full, it can produce up
  to 140 MW. almost instantaneously.

   Substation         (4)

  The substation is adjacent to the power station;
  it has been developed since the war into a key
  switching station for the Ruhr industrial area,
  seconi in importance only to Brauweiler

  The station was designed for eight 220-kV lines and
  two1lO-kV lines Single-circuit 220-kV lines go to
  Leithe via Hattingen, Gersteinwerk (Stodkm), Brauweiler,
  Kruckel; double-circuit lines to Letmathe and Kreuztal

  No definite information is available about the 110kV
  lines; connections possibly go to the Cunowerk and
  Hattingen stations.

   Cunowerk Power Station   Harkortsee   (2)
  The Cunowerk thermal power station - named after a
  director of the owning ocnpany - is situated 3 miles
  South-east of Witten, on the Harkortsee, a reservoir
  on the river Ruhr; it is owned by the Kommunales
  Elektrizitätswerk Mark A.G. Hagen, and has an installed
  capacity of 85 MW. It is also known as the Herdecke
  thermal power station It is a base-load station and
  has been considerably extended since it was opened in
  1908 A heat-supply systemis associated with the
  station An open-air sub station, with a number cf
  10/50'kV and other transformers and switches is situated
  in the western area of the works.

  Long-distance supplies may be given at 100 kV via the
  Koepchenwerk station (see above), 2 miles to the East
  3 lines at 50'kV connect to Gevelsberg and Schwerte,
  and via Schalksmuhle to the Elver singen station, 16
   miles to the South-east, which is also owned by the
  ooBpary.

  Local supplies at 10 kV are believed to be given,
  including a supply to the Accumulatorenfabrik Hagen
  AG 3 miles to the South-east.

   R.W.E. Power Station    Kruakel  (3)
  Owned by Rheinisch-Westfalisches Elektrizitäts-
  werk A.G. the power station is situated 3 miles
  North-east of Witten. It has an installed capacity
  of 41 MW. and contains a substation for 10/50'kV. It
  serves the surrounding industrial area


- 730 -

  Gasworks      Witten (-)

  The municipal gasworks draws its supplies
  from the Gerthe coking plant of the Bergbau-A. G.
  Lothringen. In 1936 it sold 150 million cu. ft.

  Solid Fuels

  Neu-Iserlohn Coking Plant   Somborn (3)
  The coking plant is owned by the Harpener Bergbau
  A.G, and is situated 3j miles North of Witten
  station and Just South of the village of Somborn.
  The plant has 80 ovens with an estimated annual
  dry coal capacity of 175,000 tons.

  Iron, Steel and Ferro-Alloys  

  Gusstahlwerk Witten    Witten (3)
  Owned by the Ruhrstahl A.G. group of Vereinigte
  Stahlwerke A.G,, the steelworks are situated adjoin-
  ing and South-west of Witten station. There are
  seven open-hearth furnaces having an annual estimated
  capacity of 150,000 tons of crude steel. The works
  comprises a forge containing 2 presses and 6 other
  large hammers; 1 heavy mill for rolling ingots and
  2 lighter mills for bars and sections; a wire-mill
  producing wire rope; and 8 modern heat-treatment
  furnaces for special steel.

  Annener Gusstahlwerk    Annen   (3)
  Owned by the Ruhrstahl A.G. group of Vereinigte
  Stahlwerke A.G. the steelworks are situated about 2j
   miles North-east of Witten station. There are two
  opei-hearth furnaces having an estimated annual
  capacity of 50,000 tons of crude steel. The works
  produces mainly structural steel.

  Stahlwerk Mark     Wengern (3)
  Stahlwerk Mark Wengern A.G. is a subsidiary of
  Vereinigte Stahlwerk. There are two separate but
  adjacent works situated on the Southern bank of₍
  the river Ruhr about 2rr miles South-east of Witten.
  There are 3 open-hearth furnaces and rolling mills.
  The works produce heavy steel forgings including
  parts for blast-furnaces and transformers, etc.
  In 1938 there were 650'workers.

  Engineering and Armaments

  Soeding & Co.     Witten (-)

  This firmis situated 1 mile North-east of Witten
  station in the built-up area of the town. The works
  produced machine tools before the war.

- 731 -

  Manne amannrohren-Werke A.G.  Witten  (2)
   Situated about 1 mile North-east of Witten
   station, in the built-up area of the town, these
   works are believed to supply all the contact ovens
   used in the Fischer-Tropsch process of synthetic
   oil production. In addition light-alloy tubes for
   aircraft are made.

  Demag      Wetter  (3)

   These large works of the Deutsche Maschinen-
   fabrik A.G. are situated on the North bank of the
   river Ruhr at Wetter, 4i miles South-east of
   Witten, The works make cranes, suspension cranes,
   double-acting hoists, and other products of a
   similar nature.

  Dittmann-Neuhaus    Ost-Herbede (3)

   The works of Dittmann-Neuhaus & Gabriel Bergenthal
   A.G. are situated 2^ miles W, S.W. of Witten on the
   North bank of the river Ruhr. These works, which
   are of medium size, produce springs of all types,
   and supply large quantities to the Reichsbahn for
   rolling stock.

  K. Korftaann Jr.    Witten  (3)
   These small works are situated in the built-up
   area of the town, about 1 mile North-east of Witten
   station. They specialise in the production of
   mining machinery including conveyors.

 Chemicals and Explosives

  Märkische Seifenindustrie    Witten  (-)

   These works are situated 1^- miles North-east of
   Witten station in the built-up area of the town,
   and cover 60,000 sq. metres. Soap and glycerine
   are produced and there are reported to be about
   700 workers.


- 732 -


WITTENBERG (Province Saxony)
51° 55' N. 12° 40' E: 550 miles: (20,000)

  Wittenberg is on the river Elbe and on the main railway
 line from Berlin to Halle. A branch line leads from Wittenberg
 Westwards to Rosslau, and a second line South-eastwards to
 Uebigau. The most important industry in Wittenberg itself is
 now the aircraft works mentioned below. The large fertilizer
 and chemical plant at Piesteritz, 5 miles from Wittenberg, is
 dealt with separately under the heading Piesteritz. Included in
 the list below is the nitro-cellulose plant at Reinsdorf 2 miles
 to the North-west. The other industries of Wittenberg are of
 no great size and include a chocolate factory, several slipper
 manufacturers, a number of small chemical works and engineering
 plants, and a margarine factory at Pratau, 3 miles to the South-
 west.


 Transportation


   Railway Repair Shops    Wittenberg  (3)
    These are medium-sized repair shops under-
    taking the repair of goods wagons.

 Aircraft and Aero-Engines

   Arado      Wittenberg  (2)

    The Wittenberg branch of the Arado Flugzeug-
    werke G.m.b.H. , whose parent works are in
    Brandenburg, is believed to employ more than
    1500 workers. Aircraft components, including
    fuselages and centre sections for Ju. 88s,
    He. 111 s and Ar. 95 s, are made at this large
    components works, the layout of which resembles
    that of the Brandenburg plant.


 Engineering and Armaments


A. Wetzig Wittenberg  (3)

    This firm manufactures water turbines,
    milling machinery, and grain-silo
    installations. Some 400 workers were
    employed before the war.


 Chemicals and Explosives

   Sprengstoff A.G. Reinsdorf   (2)
    This factory is operated by the Westfalische
    Anhaitische Sprengstoff A. G. During the
    last war it manufactured almost the whole
    range of military explosives, including
    T. N. T. , nitrocellulose, picric acid, nitro-
    glycerine, dynamite, and propellant powders.
    There is a certain amount of ground inform-
    ation regarding its present activities,
    which is fortunately supplemented by ex-
    cellent air photographs, dated May, 1943'

- 733 -

    The present lay-out of the plant agrees
    reasonably well with its ground plan at
    the end of the last war, with the
    significant difference that the T. N. T,
    manufacturing unit has been removed.
    The nitrocellulose and nitroglycerine
    plants do not appear to have been much
    altered, and there appears to be some
    capacity for the manufacture of finished
    propellant powders. In 1938 it was
    reported that the Reinsdorf factory
    produced 15,000 tons of nitro-cellulose
    per annum, which is a little below the
    estimate of capacity made by the Armistice
    Commission in 1919. Examination of air
    photographs taken in May, 1943, suggests
    that the nitrocellulose capacity might
    be- about 25,000 tons per annum at the
    present time. Nitroglycerine, or
    diglycoldinitrate, plant appears to be
    installed, and the capacity may be very
    roughly estimated at about 6,000 tons
    per annum.

 

WITTENBERGE (Brandenburg)
53° N. 11° 45' E: 515 miles: (40,000)

    Wittenberge is on the main railway line midway between
   Hamburg and Berlin. A branch line diverges at Wittenberge
   and leads via Stendal to Magdeburg. There are large railway
   workshops, an important engineering works, and a cellulose
   factory, which are described below. The other industries
   include several minor engineering firms and small chemical
   plants. Wittenberge is an important centre for a large
   agricultural district.

 Transportation

    Railway Repair Shops    Wittenberge (3)
    These large-scale railway workshops repair
    and maintain Diesel locomotives and goods
    wagons. The plant, which includes a
    research laboratory, is believed to employ
    some 2,J00 workers.

 Public Utility Services

    Electric Power Station   Wittenberge (-)

    This thermal power station, which is owned
    by the Singer works mentioned below, has
    a capacity of 15 MW.

    Gasworks      Wittenberge (-)

    The municipal gasworks made 140 million
    cu. ft. in 1936.

- 734 -

  Engineering and Armaments



  Singer A.G.     Wittenberge (3)
  The German Singer company have their
  headquarters in Berlin, and branches in
  various other parts of Germany. The
  Wittenberge plant, which before the war
  manufactured sewing machines and employed
  some 2,000 workers, is now reported to
  have been considerably extended and to have
  been partly turned over to the production
  of radiolocation equipment.


  Chemicals and Explosives


  Kurmärkische Zellwolle   Wittenberge (3)
  The Kurmärkische Zellwolle & Zellulose
  A.G., whose headquarters are in Berlin,
  have a branch factory in Wittenberge
  which is believed to be engaged on the
  manufacture of viscose staple fibre.
  It is estimated to have a daily capacity
  of 120 tons.
 


WOLFENHÜTTEL (Brunswick)
52° 10' N. 10° 30' E: 460 miles: (20,000)



  Wolfenbttttel lies on a branch railway line 8 miles South
  of Brunswick. It lies at the foot of the Hartz Mountains in
  the valley of the river Oker and is chiefly a garrison town
  and the market centre of the surrounding agricultural district
  Wolfenbättel contains a number of small industries, including
  engineering, textiles, furniture and soap manufacture. Apart
  from the firms described below, none is of importance.



 Engineering and Armaments

  Gebr. Welger  Wolfenbüttel (-)

  This is the largest of a number of small
  engineering firms in Wolfenbüttel, of
  which the main products are agricultural
  machinery and implements and farm carts.

 - 735 -

  Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

   Ravensberger     Wolfenbuttel (-)


    The main works of the Ravensberger
    Spinnerei A.G. are in Bielefeld.
    The branch works at Wolfenbuttel
    specialise in flax spinning, and the
    mill has 10,400 spimiles. The
    factory is now probably inactive.



WOLFRATSHAUSEN (Bavaria)
47° 55' N. 11° 25' E: 570 miles: (5,000)

   Wolfratshausen lies on the railway line between Munich
  and Biehl, 15 miles South of Munich and immediately to the
  East of the Starnberger See. The town has no industrial
  development apart from the large explosives factory
  described below.



 Chemicals and Explosives

Dynamit A.G. Wolfratshausen (3)
   This is an extrenely large plant which
   has been built during the war. Both
   powder manufacture and the filling of
   weapons has been reported, but the
   evidence of air-photography suggests
   primarily a powder-incorporating
   plant. It is perhaps significant that,
   the press houses seem adapted for
   making powder in unusually large sizes,
   which evidence may be related to a
   report from a ground source that the
   factory is engaged principally in
   making explosive charge for rocket
   projectiles.


- 736 -



WORMS (Hesse)
49° 40' N. 8° 20' E: 395 miles: (52,000)

  Worms, which is 12 miles North of Mannheim, is on tho
railway which follows the left bank of the Rhine from Mainz,
to the Upper Rhine valley. It is an important centre of
leather manufacture. Other industries, which are on a minor
scale, include engineering, chemicals, and furniture maki ng.
Worms has a small inland port.

 Transportation

  Inland Port    Worms   (3)
  There are two harbours in the Eastern quarter
  of the town, the Handelshafen and the Flosshafen.
  These docks are perved by rail sidings, and
  there are warehouses and storage depots in
  the area.

 Public Utility Services

  Gasworks     Worms   (3)

  The municipal gasworks made 200 million
  ou. ft. in 1936.

 Leather

  Cornelius Heyl A.G.  Worms   (3)
  This important firmis believed to be one of
  the largest German manufacturers of leather,
  including box calf, patent chrome side, calf
  and russet, and also all fancy leather wear.
  The factory employed some 3,200 workers
  before the war.

  Heyl'sehe Lederwerke G.m.b.H. Worms   (3)
  The Heylsehe Lederwerke Liebenau vorn.
  Cornelius Heyl Werk Liebenau G.m.b.H.
  are important producers of upper, side,
  and box-calf leather and employed some
  1,200 workers before the war.

  Doerr & Reinhart G.m.b.H. Worms   (-)

  This firm,' which has a similar range of
  products to those mentioned above,
  employed some 500 workers in 1939.

 Foodstuffs

  Zuckerfabrik Rheingau   Worms   (-)

  The Zuckerfabrik Rheingau A.G., which is
  owned by the Sfiddeutsohe Zucker A.G.
  Mannheim, employed 200 workers before the
  war.

  Flour Mills    Port Area   (-)

  There are several flour mills in the neigh-
  bourhood of the inland port with a total
  estimated daily milling capacity of 400 tons.

- 737 -

WUPPERTAL (Rhineland)
51° 15' N. 7° 15' E: 318 miles:  (411,000)

   Wuppertal was formed in 1929 by the amalgamation of the
towns of Elberfeld and Barmen. It lies on either side of the
river Wupper and stretches up the fairly narrow Wupper valley from
Vohwinkel in the West to Langerfeld 10 miles to the East.
Industry in Wuppertal is mainly textile, but there is also the
large chemical works of I.G. Farben Indus trie and several
engineering firms of which one is an important producer of ball-
bearings.
   The principal means of internal transport is the
famous Wuppertal-Schwebebahn, a monorail suspension railway over
the river which operates over a distance of eight miles with 30
stations between Ober-Barmen and Vohwinkel

 Transportation

 Marshalling Yard     Vohwinkel (3)
   This yard, situated J miles West of
   Elberfeld, has capacity for handling 2,900
   wagons in 24 hours. It is at the Junction
   of the main line to Essen.

 Public Utility Services

 Städtische Elektrizitätswerke   Elberfeld (3)
   The municipal thermal power station is
   situated in the western area of the town.
   It has an installed capacity of 20 MW.
   and is a peak-load and standby station,
   used mostly fbr town heating supplies.

 Kraftwerk Barmen     Barmen (3)
   The municipal thermal power station has an
   installed capacity of 20 MW. It is
   situated below the Barmen-Neubruch railway
   station.

 Städtische Gasanstalt     Elberfeld (3)
   The municipal gasworks are situated in the
   western outskirts of the town area
   adjoining the railway to Vohwinkel. They
   supply the whole of Wuppertal. In 1936 the
   municipality sold 1,900 million cu. ft. of
   gas of these sales 750 million cu. ft. were
   manufactured, and 1,150 million cu.ft. were
   purchased from the Thyssen and Ruhrgas grids.

 Non-ferrous Metals Manufacture and Fabrication

 Julius & August Erbsloh Ifletallwerke A. G. Barmen (3)
   The large site occupied by this firmis in
   the centre of Barmen. It is a metal works
   producing aluminium wrought alloys and
   wrought-alloy products, mainly sheets,
   rectangles, sections, rods, wire, and tubes.

- 738 -

  Engineering and Armaments

  G. & J. Jaeger.     Elberfeld (2)
   This firm manufactures heavy roller and
   heavy ball bearings including aero-engine
   bearings. The works has a floor space
   of 607,000 sq. ft. on a site of 43 acres.
   Number of workers are estimated at 1500.
   The factory is thought to be specially
   important for the manufacture of tank
   bearings for turrets and other heavy
   applications.

  Prazisionswerkzeugfabrik Svenssen.   Elberfeld (-)

   This firm, with seme 200 workers,
   manufactures precision machine tools and
   milling machinery.

  Metalldraht G.nub.H.    Elberfeld (3)
   Just North of the city's main marshalling
   yards, this film occupies a large site
   which extends both sides of the river
   Wupper. It is believed to be engaged
   mainly on the production of fine wire for
   the electrical industry.

  Karl Walter       Elberfeld (3)
   

   This works occupies a fairly large site
   to the South-west of a group of industrial
   buildings lying North of the city's main
   marshalling yards. It was engaged on the
   production of machinery for the textile
   industry but is now probably producing
   essential war goods.

  Vorwerk & Co.      Barmen (3)
   This firm has two large plants in Barmen.
   One of these, to the S.W. of the city, is
   described under R. and T.‘. The other is
   divided into two sections, one part
   described under T., R., P. and P.”.  The second
   part (described here)
is concerned with
   the production of gear-wheels and wheels
   and machinery for the chemical industry.
   The total nuinber of workers in the second
   plant is estimated at some 800.

  Heimann Leimbach.      Barmen. (-)

   Precision machine tools and milling
   machinery are produced by this firm
   with seme 100 workers.

  Maschinenfabrik Rheinwerk G.m.b.H.   Ober-Barmen (3)
   This firm manufactures compressed air
   containers and machinery components, also


- 739 -


  wood-gas generators. 400 workers are
  employed

0.Albert & Co.      Barmen (3)
  Before the war, this firm was mainly-
  engaged on the production of pressed
  parts for motor vehicles and motor-
  vehicle accessories. Its production
  of iron and steel drawn, die-cast,
  and pressed parts and rolled and
  concave profiles is now utilized in
  all probability for essential war
  products other than or in addition
  to motor-vehicles.

Barmen Maschinenfabrik A.G.     Barmen (3)
  Textile machinery and special machines
  for the rayon industry are produced, with
  some 400 workers, by this firm, which is
  owned by Bereinigte Glanzstoff-Fabriken
  A. G. , Elberfeld.

Emil Linde Maschinenfabrik.     Barmen (3)

  This plant covers a fairly large site to
  the Northwest of Barmen and specializes in
  machine tools and presses.

Franz Durholdt.       Barmen (3)

  Comprising a metal foundry and workshops,
  the works occupy a fairly large site to
  the west of Barmen. Castings, Joinings
  and fittings for chemical and textile
  factories are produced.

Emil Kehlenbach.       Barmen (-)

  This firm produced textile machinery
  before the war and occupied a fairly
  extensive site to the extreme West
  of Barmen, North of the Guterbahnhof-
  Barmen. Its present activity is not
  known.

Dr. Schmidt & Apelt K.G.   Barmen-Langerfeld (3)  

  This firmis one of Germany¹ s main
  manufacturers of furnaces for the
  steel industry. It makes electric
  furnaces and accessories and annealing
  and hardening furnaces.

 Chemicals and Explosives

 I. G. Farbenindustrie A. G.     Elberfeld. (1)
  This plant of the I. G. Farben comprises
  an oxygen works, and works for the
  production of dyes and colours, and
  medicinal and pharmaceutical preparations

- 740 -

     including quinine. It is situated at
     the western end of the town of Elberfeld,
     and stretches over both sides of the
     River Wupper and its overhead railway.
     Immediately to the West and East of
     the plant respectively are the
     municipal gasworks and the Elberfeld
     power station. Workers are estimated
     to number some 4,000. The plant
     also included one of the most important
     of the I.G. research units, particularly
     for research on tropical diseases, and
     physiological and pharmacological
     laboratories.

  Ferdinand Gebhard      Elberfeld (-)

     Although aerial cover shows that this
     plant has been extended since the out-
     break of war and covers a large area
     to the West of the main passenger
     station, nothing is known of the
     details of production nor the
     number of workers. It is believed,
     however, that pharmaceuticals are
     being manufactured.

  Chemische Fabrik Einergraben, Dr. L&hmann & Co.      Barmen. (-)

     This plant covers a very extensive
     site, but it is not known to what
     extent the buildings are active or
     what is being made, except that in
     1938 this firm was said to have a
     sulphuric-acid works in Wuppertal-
     Barmen. It is possible that since
     the war the concern has been taken
     over by I. G. Farben.

 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper .

   Frowein & Co. A.G.     Elberfeld. (-)

     This firm were manufacturers of band
     cord twine and artificial silk before the
     war. Their present activity is not known.

   Elberfelder Textil-Werke A.G.  Elberfeld. (-)

     This plant has 3,000 looms and is
     mainly concerned with the weaving of
     combed yarn. Workers in 1938
     numbered 740. It is now inactive,

   Kunstseiden A.G.    Barmen. (-)


     Owned by the Vereinigte Glanzstoff-
     Fabriken A.G. Elberfeld, this firm
     was concerned with the refining,
     processing, and weaving of rayon.
     Workers numbered 1,000 before the
     war, but the works is believed to
     have been largely inactive since
     1940.

- 741 -

Vorwerk & Co. Barmen. (-)

    This section of the second Vorwerk
    plant in Barmen is the largest
    manufacturer of carpets in Germany.
    Rugs and linoleum are also produced.
    (For workers see "Engineering and
    Armament". )


   J. & P.Bemberg A.G.   Langerfeld/Oelide. (3)


    This large rayon plant, situated
    to the South-east of Barmen is
    controlled by the Vereinigte
    Glanzstoff-Fabriken A.G. , Elberfeld,
    capacity was 11,000 kg, per day of
    Cuprammonium rayon before the war.
    The works cover an area of 31,220 sq.
    metres on a site of 41 ,038 sq, metres.
    The nuriber of workers was 4500 in
    1938 The plant has its own power
    station with a capacity of 3,800 kW.
    but is believed to have been largely
    inactive since 1942.


- 742 -

WÜRZBURG (Bavaria)
49° 48' N. 9° 55' E:  460 miles: (107,000)

 Würzburg is 55 miles North-west of Nurnberg, and is the
administrative centre of the Bavarian district of Lower Franconia,
It is on the river Main, and the town is built mainly on the right
bank. Wurzburg is an important railway centre, and two trunk lines
pass through the town from Frankfort/Main to Nuremburg, and from North
Germany to Stuttgart. The main railway station and goods yards are to
the North of the central area of the town, which is a closely-built
area enclosed by a belt of gardens which have taken the place of the
former city walls. North-west and North— east of the central area are
large barracks, which up to the outbreak of war were occupied by
armoured and motorised divisions.

 WÜrzburg is in the midst of a large agricultural district, and
is an important flour-milling centre, the industry being in the hands of
a number of medium-sized undertakings. Wine and fruit are largely grown
in Franconia, and Wurzburg has also three large breweries which did a
big export trade in peace-time.

 The other industries are varied, and although none of the
individual firms is large, engineering, textiles, varnish and dye
manufacture, and furniture-making are all represented and in the
aggregate give Würzburg considerable industrial importance. The
industries are mainly grouped in the northern and eastern quarters of
the town.

 West of Wurzburg there is an important link station on the 110 kV
transmission line between the Bayemwerk and the R.W. E.

 There is also a small inland harbour on the northern side of the
town on the river Main.

 Transportation

 Inland Harbour     Wurzburg  (3)
  The small inland harbour is on the right bank of
  the Main to the West of the main railway station
  It is served by rail sidings and includes several
  warehouses and storage depots.

 Railway Junction    WÜrzburg  (3)
  The main railway station is immediately North of
  the central town area. The railway line from
  Frankfort/Main and the Rhine valley to Southern
  Germany enters WÜrzburg from the North-west, and
  immediately East of the main railway station
  divides into two branches, of which one leads to
  Nuremberg and Regensburg, and the second through
  Ingolstadt to Munich. Wurzburg is also on the main
  line which runs from Berlin and Magdeburg through
  Erfurt 'nd Wurzburg to Stuttgart and South-western
  Germany.

- 743 -

  Railway Repair Shopa    Würzburg   (3)
   The railway-repair shops are adjacent to the
   main railway station. They undertake the repair
   and maintenance of goods wagons.

  Marshalling Yards   ,  wßrzburg   (3)

   The marshalling yards, which also adjoin the
   main railway station, can handle up to 2,000
   wagons per 24 hours.

 Public Utility Services

  Bayernwerk     Unterdßrrbacher Landstr. (2)

   This is an important switching station on the
   220-kV line between Nuremberg and Frankfort/Main,
   and an important link on the 110-kV transmission
   line between the Bayernwerk and the R.W.E:

  Gasworks      Würzburg   (3)

   The municipal gasworks are adjacent to the main
   railway station in the Northern quarter of the
   town. They made 425 million cu. ft. in 1936.

 Liquid Fuels and Substitutes

  Oil Storage     Würzburg   (-)

   There are a number of storage tanks, chiefly
   grouped to the East of the main railway station,
   in the neighbourhood of the Aumühle. The total
   storage capacity is estimated at 10,000 tons.

  Non-Ferrous Metal Manufacture and Fabrication

  W. Stecher     Blasiesgasse (-)

  Ruckert A Co.      Kaiserstr.  (-)

   The above are two firms of tin-founders and
   manufactures of tinware.

 Shipbuilding

  Paul M. Stuhler     Alte Kasern Str. (-)

  Stuhler & Hupp     Seilerstr.  (-)

   The above are two small firms building mainly
   river craft and small barges.

- 744 -

 Engineering and Armaments

  Georg Noell     Number gstr.  (3)
  The Georg Noell & Co. , Maschinen & Eisenbahhbedarfs-
  Fabrik und Brückenbau-Anstalt are makers of railway
  signalling installations and industrial weighing
  machines. They manufacture complete railway point
  systems, and also coal-conveying plant and
  travelling platforms, and bridge constructions. In
  peacetime this firm employs some 600 workers.

  König & Nauer      Friedrich König Str. (3)
  The Schnellpressenfabrik König & Bauer A.G. are
  an old-established firm manufacturing printing
  machinery, who claim to be the pioneers of the high-
  speed printing press in Germany. In peacetime they
  employed some 1,300 workers, and were important makers
  of all types of printing machines, including high-
  speed news presses. According to ground intelligence
  the works was converted in 1939 to make small arms and
  a variety of unspecified armaments.

  Sturtz       Beethoven Str. (-)

  Before the war the Universitäts-Druckerei H. Stürtz
  A.G. were an important firm of book-printers and book-
  binders. They employed some 600 workers before the
  war and the works had an engineering section with
  machine shops etc. presumably for the repair and
  maintenance of printing installations.

  Bohn & Herber      Horst Wessel Str. (-)

  The Bohn & Herber Maschinenfabrik & Eisengiesserei
  are manufacturers of printing presses.

  Gebr. Hofmann      Eibelstadt   (-)

  The Gebr. Hofmann Landmaschinenfabrik & Eisengiesserei
  are makers of agricultural and flour-milling machinery,
  canning machines, and wine presses. Their works are
  at Eibelstadt on the right bank of the Main, 4 miles
  upstream from Wurzburg.
  Sirch & Sohn      Semmelstr.   (-)

  This firm, which employs several hundred workers
  in peacetime, manufactured industrial weighing
  machines and safes. Their present activity is
  not known.
  Ernst Stenz     Schweinfurterstr. (-)

  The Franken Indus trie-Werke Ernst Stenz are makers of
  sheet metal, wire netting, and hardware.
  A. Obermeier      Reuerergasse  (-)

  This firm manufactured refrigerators for industrial
  and domestic use.

- 745 - 

 Chemicals and Explosives

 Bavaria      Hindenburgstr. (-)

  The Chemische Fabrik Bavaria are small
  manufacturers of pharmaceuticals.

  ilmann Nachfolger    Oswaldspitalgasse (-)

  The Heilmann Nachf. In. Ver. are makers of
  paints and varnishes.

 Friedrich Woesch    Wredestr.  (-)

  Before the war this firm manufactured fireworks.

  Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

 L. & C. Meyer     Martinstr.   (-)

 Eugen Flurschütz    Bruderhof

   The Werkstatte Kunstgewerblicher Wollwaren L' & C.
   Meyer and the firm of Eugen Flur schütz are makers of
   hosiery and knitted and woven goods.

 Leather

 Schübel & Co.     Bohnesmuhlgasse (-)

   This firm manufactures driving belts and
   similar leather goods.

  Foodstuffs

 Franconia     Zeppelnistr.  (-)

   Prior to the war the Franconia Schokoladenwerke
   A. G. manufactured cocoa, chocolate, and
   confectionery, and employed some 300 workers.

 Adam Schulz      Muhlenstr.   (-)

 V. Hoffmann (-)

   The above are believed to be the two largest of
   several flour mills in the Würzburg area.

WURZEN (Saxony)
51° 20' N. 12° 45' E: 555 miles (19,000)

 Wurzen lies 15 miles East of Leipzig on the main railway to Dresden.
There are several small engineering works in the town and a number of
firms making electric-light fittings, which have become a speciality
of Wurzen. Wurzen is an agricultural market centre; and there is also
a biscuit factory, which is described below.

- 746 -

 Engineering and Armaments


Schutz Wurzen  (3)

   The firm of G. A. Schutz manufacture vacuum pimps
   filters, and air and gas compressors. Some 300
   workers were employed before the war.


 Senior Werk      Wurzen  (-)

   The Senior Werk Busse are manufacturers of
   agricultural machinery and implements. 150' workers
   were employed before the war.

 F. A. Dümich      Wurzen (-)

 Türk & Müller      Wurzen -)

 Paul Gitte     Wurzen -)

   The above are three examples of several firms in
   Wurzen producing all kinds of electric lamps and
   light fittings.

  Foodstuffs

 Biscuitfabrik     Wurzen  (-)

   The Wur zener Kunstmuhlenwerke & Biscuitfabriken
   vorm. F Krietsch A.G. are biscuit makers who
   employed some 500 workers in peacetime.



WUSTERMARK (Brandenburg)
52° 35' N. 12° 56' E: 480 miles:  (1,000)


 Wustermark is a small country town 16 miles West of Berlin, in
the vicinity of the large military training area and town of D&beritz.
It has no industries, but is of considerable importance as a railway
centre, fromits situation on the main line from Berlin to the Ruhr
and to Paris, Brussels and Rotterdam via Stendal, and Hanover, Goods
traffic for Hamburg and the northern ports proceeds via Wustermark
where it is turned north to Join the main northern line at Nauen,


 Transportation
 Marshalling Yard    Wustermark (2)
   The marshalling yard has capacity for handling
   5,800 wagons in 24 hours.

- 747 -


WYHLEN (Baden)
47° 35' N. 7° 55' E: 445 miles: (5,000)

  Wyhlen is 4 miles East of Basle and is on the Upper Rhine
  close to the Swiss frontier. It is approximately halfway between
  Basle and Rheinfelden. The hydro-electric station at Augst-Wyhlen
  is dsalt with under the heading HWaldshutM.

 Engineering and Armaments

  Eisenbau Wyhlen A. G.    Wyhlen   (-)

   The Eisenbau Wyhlen A. G. are constructors
   of bridges and steel frame buildings. They
   have a factory in Wyhlen which employed some
   300 workers before the war.

- 748 -

ZEITZ (Province Saxony)
51° 5' N. 12° 10' E:    530 miles: (35,000)

 Zeitz lies 8 miles North of G-era on the railway to Leipzig. It
is the junction for a branch line leading to Weissenfels. It is one
of the administrative centres for the exploitation of the browncoal
deposits in this area. An important synthetic-oil plant at
Troglitz, J miles North-east of Zeitz, obtains its raw material from
these browncoal deposits, which also supply the fuel for the thermal
power station attached to the works. The industries of Zeitz
itself include several engineering works, of which the largest are
mentioned below, and several manufacturers of pianos, which in
peacetime is a speciality of the town.

 Transportation

 Marshalling Yards      Zeitz (3)
   The marshalling yards, which are situated
   in the Northern part of the town, are capable
   of handling 2,600 wagons per 24- hours.

 Public Utility Services

 Electric Power Station    Troglitz (2)
   This thermal power station, which is 3
    miles North-east of Zeitz, forms part of
   the synthetic-oil plant owned by the
   Braunkohle-Benzin A.G. , mentioned below
   under Liquid Fuels. The power plant
   has a capacity of 175 Miff. , and obtains its
   fuel from the adjacent brown-coal mines.

 Solid Fuels

 Riebeck       Zeitz (3)
   The A. Riebeck' sehe Montanwerke A. G.
   exploit a number of large brown-coal
   deposits in the district South of Halle,
   and Zeitz is their administrative centre
   for the group of mines situated in the
   area to the North and North-east of the
   town. This group of mines, some of
   which are deep pit mines, had a total
   output of 4-, 2 00,000 tons of brown-coal
   in 1937. There are a number of
   briquetting plants which in 1937
   produced 1,300,000 tons.

 Liquid Fuels and Substitutes
 Braunkohle-Benzin A. G.     Troglitz (-)

   This synthetic-oil plant of the
   Braunkohle-Benzin A.G. is situated in
   the small village of Troglitz, 3 miles
   to the North-east of Zeitz. It was
   estimated to have an annual capacity of

- 749 -

     320,000 tons of synthetic fuel and
     employ about 5'000 workers but recently
     suffered very severe bomb damage and is
     now completely out of action. In view
     of the improbability of industrial plant
     being available it may be assumed that
     this works will remain inactive at
     least until early 1945.


 Engineering and Armaments

Eisengiesserei Zeitz (3)


The Zeltser Eisengiesserei £ Maschinenbau
A'G. are makers of special machinery and
equipment for the brown-coal industry.
They also produce pumps and crushing
machinery. Before the war some 600
workers were employed.

Naether A.-G, Zeitz (3)



The E.Aₐ Naether A.Gk specialise in the
manufacture of perambulators of which
they are one of the leading German
suppliers. In peacetime they employed
some 1500 workers. The firmis
x'eported to be fully active but its
present range of products is not
known.

A. Fahr Zeitz (-)
Hupfer Ä Comp.  Zeitz  -)
   Schmidt & Sohn Nachf. -)

    These are three of several firms
    in Zeitz which before the war
    manufactured pianos.

- 750 -

ZELLA-MEHLIS (Thuringia)
50° 40' N. 10° 40' E: 470 miles:  (30,000)


   Zella-Mehlis lies in the Thüringer Wald, 3 miles North
  of Suhl. The industries are mainly concerned with the
  manufacture of small arms. Zella-Mehlis is industrially ar
  off-shoot of Suhl, which is an important centre for this
  branch of industry. There are also several firms in Zella-
  Mehlis which specialise in all kinds of bicycle and motor-
  cycle components.


 Engineering and Armaments


  Germania Waffenwerk A.G.   Zella-Mehlis (-)

    The J.G. Anschutz Germania Waffenwerk A.G.
    are important manufacturers of rifles,
    pistols, machine guns, and S.A.A. They
    are reported to employ up to 5,000 workers.

  Carl Walther     Zella-Mehlis (3)
    This firm produces automatic pistols and
    rifles, and in peacetime specialises in'
    various types of office machinery. Tb^y
    are now said to be the leading German
    manufacturers of signal pistols. It is
    reported that the works have been
    considerably extended during the war,
    and that in addition to infantry weapons,
    they are now making locomotive bogies and
    possibly also aircraft components.

  Mercedes A.G.     Zella-Mehlis (2)
    The Mercedes Büromascliinenwerk A.G. have
    two factories in Zella-Mehlis. In peacetime
    this company manufactured a variety of office
    equipment, including typewriters and
    calculating machines, and one section of
    the firmis still believed to be devoted to
    this type of work. The rest of the plant
    has been mainly turned over to the
    production of small-arms components, and it
    is believed that the number of workers has
    been increased to at least 4,000.

  H. Wisner A.G.      Zella-Mehlis (3)
    The Metallwarenfabrik vorm. H. Wisner A. G.
    make bicycle components, including bells
    brakes, pedals, axles, and wheels. This
    firm, which has two plants in Zella-Mehlis,
    is reported to employ some 2,000 workers.

  K. Pfestorf      Zella-Mehlis  (3)

  Moritz & Gerstenberger    Zella-Mehlis 3)

  H. Weihrauch     Zella-Mehlis 3)

    The above are three of several
    smaller firms in Zella-Mehlis which
    are now manufacturing automatic
    pistols, revolvers, and rifles.

  G.Hübing Zella-Mehlis  (3)

  A. Jopp Zella-Mehlis  3)

  K. Reich Zella-Mehlis  3)

- 751 -


    The above three examples of a large number
    of firms making all kinds of small components
    for bicycles and motorcycles.


Rohm Ges. Zella-Mehlis (-)


    The Rohm Gesellschaft makes machine tools,
    chiefly for use in the small-arms factories.
    This firm employed some 300 workers before
    the war.




ZEULENRODA (Thuringia)
50° 40' N. 12° E: 530 miles: (13,000)

 Zeulenroda lies 25 miles East of Saalfeld, The town has
developed a specialised industry in the manufacture of knitted
and woven rubber goods. Other industries include the
manufacture of machine tools and furniture. The principal
firms are described below.

 Engineering and Armaments

 Adolf Lang     Zeulenroda (-)

   The Adolf Lang Werkzeugmaschinenfabrik are
   manufacturers of all kinds of lathes. The
   firm was formerly known as Baumann & Falck
   G.m.b,H, 350'workers were employed before
   the war,

 Carl Roth     Bleichenweg (-)

   This firm specialises in machine tools
   for the rubber industry.

 Rubber and Tyres

 Roiapler      Zeulenroda (3)

   The Julius Rompler A.G. are the largest
   of the rubber-wear manufacturers in
   Zeulenroda' They specialise in rubber
   weaving and knitting, and their products
   include rubber stockings, body-belts,
   corsets, bandages, and sports wear.
   They employed some 800 workers before
   the war.

  Paul Lotter K.G,    Zeulenroda   (-)

  August Pfuller     Zeulenroda -)


  J, Zorn & Co. G' m, b, H,   Zeulenroda -)

   The above are three of several firms in

- 752 -


   Zeulenroda specialising before the war
   in the manufacture of rubber stockings
   and other knitted and woven rubber
   goods.



ZITTAU (Saxony)
50° 55' N. 14° 5' E: 650 miles (40,000)

 Zittau is on a branch railway line 30 miles South-east
of Bautzen and close to the former Czechoslovak frontier.
The chief industry of the town comprises a number of textile
mills, of which the engineering works, of which one has
attained some importance during the war. To the North-
east of Zittau is a brown-coal mining district, which
provides the fuel for a large thermal power plant described
below under P. U. S.

Public Utility Services

 Electric Power Plant     Hirschfelde (1)
  This thermal power plant belongs to the
  A, G. Sächsische Werke and has an installed
  capacity of 249 Mff. Fuel is obtained from
  the adjacent brown-coal mines, which are
  described below. The power from this
  plant is supplied to a number of local
  lines and also direct to Dresden-S&d,
  Görlitz, and to the Niederwartha pumped-
  storage station (pee Radebeul). The
  power-station site also includes the first
  large scale Lurzi gasworks to be built in
  Germany.
 Gasworks       Zittau   (3)
  The Zittau municipal gasworks which made
  110 million cu. ft. of gas in 1936, now
  obtain their supplies for distribution
  from the Lurgi gasworks at Hirschfelde.

 Solid Fuels
 Braunkohlenwerk     Hirschfelde (3)
  The open-cast brown-coal mine of the
  Braunkohlenwerk Hirschfelde is 3 miles
  to the North-east of Zittau. The
  output in 1938 was 2,000,000 tons.
  The briquetting plant belonging to
  this mine had an output of 160,000
  in 1938, when workers were employed

 Engineering and Armaments
 Phänomen      Zittau   (3)
  The Phanomsn-Werke Gustav Hiller A. G.
  produce bicycles, motorcycles, and
  lorries. They are now supplying these


- 753 -

   these to the armed forces, and it is
   reported that the plant is now building
   the K.F. &J1 under licence from the
   Auto-Union. 1,000 workers were
   employed at this plant before the war,
   but it is believed that this number
   will have been considerably increased.

Maschenfabrik Zittau (-)


   The Zittauer Maschinenfabrik A.G-. are
   the largest of a number of factories in
   Zittau specialising in the manufacture of
   machinery for the textile industry. Some
   500 workers were employed before the war.


 Chemicals and Explosives

Elektrochemische 0. m.b. H. Hirschfelde-Zittau (3)

    This firmis a subsidiary of Chemische
   Fabrik von Heyden A. G. , Radebeul, and
   Elektra A. G. Dresden. They an
   important carbide plant at Hirschfelde
   and in 1936 had an estimated capacity
   of 10,000 tons p.a. They also
   manufacture cyanamide, the capacity
   for which in 1958 is estimated to have
   been 2,000 metric tons as nitrogen.


- 754 -


ZOPPOT (Danzig)
54° 25' N. 17° 35' E: 805 miles:   (25,000)

 Zoppot lies in the former Free State of Danzig on the Western
shore of the Danziger Bucht, 5 miles North-west of Danzig, It is a
residential suburb of Danzig, and is mainly a holiday resort. There
are no industries of importance.

 
ZSCHOPAU (Saxony)
50° 45' N. 13° 5' E: 570 miles: (9,000)

 Zschopau lies on a branch railway line 12 miles South of
Chemnitz. A large works belonging to the Auto-Union of Chemnitz is
established in Zschopau and has now become the most important industrial
undertaking in the town. Apart from this there are a number of textile
firms.

 Engineering and Armaments

 D.K.W.      Zschopau   (2)
  The D.K.W. works are a branch of the Auto-Union
  A.G-. of Chemnitz. They are in the Southern quarter
  of the town on the Eastern bank of the Zschopau
  river. These works have been greatly enlarged since
  1939 and are now believed to employ a total of 6 .500
  workers. The main products are A.F.Vs, No details
  are available as to the type of A.F.V. which is made
  or the rate of production

 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

 Baunwollspinnerei     Zschopau   (-)

  The Zschopauer Baisnwollsp inner ie A.G-. are the
  largest of several textile mills in Zschopau. Their
  cotton spinning mill employed approximately 1,000
  workers before the war.


ZWEIBRUCKEN (Bavaria)
49° 15' N. 7° 20' E:  365 miles: (28,000)

 Zweibrücken lies 15 miles East of Saarbrücken on the railway
leading from Karlsruhe and the upper Rhine valley to the Saar
territory. It is largely an administrative centre for the Western
section of the Bavarian Palatinate and is a market for the surrounding
agricultural district. In addition to the engineering works mentioned
below there are two small weaving mills and a boot and shoe factory.

- 755 -


 Engineering and Armaments

 Dinglenrerke      Zweibrffcken  (2)

   The Dinglerwerke A.G. are makers of high-pressure
   containers, pumps, gas holders, mining equipment,
   road construction machinery, and equipment and
   installntions for synthetic-oil plants' The firm
   is one of the principal German manufacturers of
   hl aRt. furnaces and blast-furnace equipment and
   produces complete installations with all accessories.
   Before the war seme 1500 workers were employed.

 T^nr, A.G.     Zweibrücken   (3)

   The parent works of the Heinrich Lanz A.G. are in
   Mannheim. The Zweibrücken branch works manufacture
   mainly agricultural machinery and implements.



ZWICKAU (Saxony)
50° 45' N. 12° 30' E: 550 miles: (85,000)

 Zwickau lies on the railway from Chemnitz to Plauen and is the
junction for a branch line leading to Aue. It is in the centre of the
Saxon hard-coal mining district, of which the three largest mines are
mentioned below. There are large railway repair shops and a number
of engineering works, including the Horch and the Audi works,
important makers of military transport. The textile industry is
represented by several medium-sized cotton and worsted yarn spinners.

 Transportation

 Railway Repair Shops    Zwickau   (2)
   These are large railway workshops which undertake
   the repair and maintenance of locomotives and goods
   wagons. Some 3500 workers are believed to be
   employed. These works are also reported to be
   constructing mobile railway-repair units for use
   on the Eastern front.
 
 Public Utility Services

 Electric Power Station   Zwickau   (2)
   The Zwickau thermal electric power station has
   a capacity of 35 W.

 Gasworks      Zwickau   (3)
   The works of the Landesgasversorgung Sachsen A.G.
   draw gas from the two largest coking plants
   mentioned below and distribute it to the town of
   Zwickau and some 25 other neighbouring places
   In 1936 they sold 600 million cu. ft.

- 756 -

  Solid Fuels

 Erzgebirgi scher A.V.    Bockwa   (3)
   The Erzgebirgischer SteinkohleiWiktienverein
   is the largest coalnnining undertakii^ in the
   neighbourhood of Zwickau. Their pits, which
   have 5 pitheads, are grouped in and around the
   South-eastern suburb of Bockwa, and in 1938
   produced 800,000 tons of coal. Their coking plant
   has an annual rated dry coal capacity of 150,000
   tons. Sane 4500 workers were employed in 1938.

 Morgenstern     Pohlau   (3)
   The pits of the Gewerkschaft Morgenstern are situated
   near the Eastern suburb of Pöhlau. There are 9 pit-
   heads. This group of mines in 1938 produced 610,000
   tons of coal. The coking plant has an annual rated
   dry-coal capacity of 100,000 tons. The briquetting
   plant produced 24,000 tons in 1934 Some 3,000 workers
   were employed in 1937.

 Oberhohndorf er     Oberhohndorf  (-)

   The A.G. Zwickau-Oberhohndorfer Steinkohleribauverein
   has a coal mine with 3 pitheads immediately to the
   South-east of Zwickau. In 1938 some 250,000 tons cf
   coal were produced. There is a small coking plant.
   In 1937 seme 1500 workers were enployed.

  Aircraft and Aero-Engines

 Gebr. Basser K.G.    Zwickau   (2)
   This firm has erected an aircraft repair depot
   during the war on the airfield which lies to the
   South-west of Zwickau. The works, which are on a
   large scale, specialise in the repair of F.W.190s.
   In February, 1944,94 aircraft were seen on this
   field, of which the majority were W.190's.

  Engineering and Armaments

 Horch      August-Horch Str.  (2)
 Audi Werke     Hindenburg Str. 2)
   These two plants are owned by the Auto-Union A.G.
   of Chemnitz. They produce all types of military
   transport, including six-wheeled armoured oars.
   Audi is reported to manufacture various types of
   engines under licence from Horoh and Adler. Horch
   are stated to be manufacturing the K.F.Z.17, K.F.Z.12,
   and SIR 76 under licence from Steyr. The Audi plant
   employed some 3,000 and the Horch seme 4,000 workers
   before the war.

- 757 -

 Friemann & Wolff G.m.b.H.    Reichenbacherstr. (-)

   This firm manufactures machine tools, accumulators,
   M.T. components, and miners safety lamps.

 Gebr. Jacob     Seilers tr.   (3)
   The Gebr. Jacob G-.m.b.H. are manufacturers of
   domestic and industrial gas appliances. They
   employed some 500 workers before the war.

 Maschinenfabrik     Reichenbacherstr. (-)

   The Zwickauer Maschinenfabrik A.G. are manufacturers
   of pumps, compressors, high-pressure containers, and
   other equipment for chemical works and synthetic-oil
   plants. Before the war they employed some 200 workers.

 Hofmann & Zinkeisen     Reicheribacherstr. (-)

   The Hofmann & Zirikeisen G.m.b.H. are makers of mining
   machinery, machinery for brickworks, and ore-crushing
   apparatus. Their works include a small iron foundry,
   and employed seme 200 workers before the war.

 Herzig & Heynann     Schneebergerstr. (-)

 0. Kohler      Adolf Hitler Ring -)


   The above are two examples of a number of firms in
   Zwickau which specialise in the manufacture of all
   kinds of weighing machines.

 Chemicals and Explosives

 Louis Blumer      Zwickau   (-)

   The firm of Louis Blumer is one of the chief German
   manufacturers of tar-acid resins. The chief products
   of their factory are Diphen and Laccain (taN-acid
   resins)
and they also manufacture Duxol, Duxalkyd,
   Makopal, Resenoplast, Tallalkyd (Glyptals).

 Textiles, Rayon, Pulp and Paper

 Kammgarn Spinnerei     Pblbitzerstr. (-)

   The Zwickauer Kammgarn Spinnerei A.G. and their
   subsidiary firm the Baumwollspinnerei Zwickau A.G.
   have two adjacent spinning mills, each of which has
   50,000 spimiles. Approximately 1,000 workers were
   employed before the war.

 - 758 -
